Fast growing critical minerals markets remain turbulent, with prices falling sharply in 2023 following two years of dramatic increases. Battery materials saw particularly large declines with lithium spot prices plummeting by 75% and cobalt, nickel, and graphite prices dropping by 30 45%. The IEA Energy Transition Mineral Price Index, which tracks a basket price of copper, major battery metals and rare earth elements, tripled in the two years following January 2020, but relinquished most of the increase by the end of 2023 although copper prices remained at elevated levels. Demand growth has remained robust. Demand for critical minerals experienced strong growth in 2023, with lithium demand rising by 30%, while demand for nickel, cobalt, graphite and rare earth elements all saw increases ranging from 8% to 15%. Clean energy applications have become the main driver of demand growth for a range of critical minerals. Electric vehicles  consolidated their position as the largest consuming segment for lithium, and increased their share considerably in the demand for nickel, cobalt and graphite. The main reason for price declines has been a strong increase in supply and ample inventories of technologies made with critical minerals. From Africa to Indonesia and the People’s Republic of China , the ramp up of new supply outpaced demand growth over the past two years. Together with an inventory overhang in the downstream sector  and a correction of overly steep price rises in 2021 2022, this produced downward pressure on prices. Clean energy deployment continues to advance in all our scenarios for the future, including a strong growth story for EVs. Following the 75% growth in deployment in 2023, solar PV and wind account for the majority of capacity additions in every region in all IEA scenarios. This is accompanied by a substantial expansion of electricity networks, pushing up demand for copper and aluminium. Electric car sales neared 14 million in 2023, a 35% year on year increase, and continued growth is projected as major markets progress and adoption increases in emerging economies. In a scenario that limits global warming to 1,5 °C , the sales share of electric cars rises from 18% today to 65% in 2030, pushing up demand for batteries by a factor of seven to 6 TWh in 2030. Electric cars are the major source of demand for batteries, but battery storage for the power sector exhibits faster growth. Today’s well supplied market may not be a good guide for the future, as demand for critical minerals continues to rise. Just as clean energy deployment expands, so too does demand for critical minerals. Mineral demand for clean energy technologies doubles between today and 2030 in a scenario that reflects today’s policy settings, the Stated Policies Scenario . It is even higher in a scenario that meets all national energy and climate goals in full, the Announced Pledges Scenario , and it almost triples by 2030 and quadruples by 2040 in the NZE Scenario, reaching nearly 40 Mt. Lithium sees the most rapid growth in demand, due to rising EV battery needs. In the NZE Scenario, for example, it increases by a factor of nine to 2040. In terms of production volume, copper , which connects a more electrified energy system has by far the largest increase. Graphite demand almost quadruples by 2040 in the NZE Scenario, while demand for nickel, cobalt and rare earth elements doubles. Strong growth in demand produces a major uptick in the overall value of critical minerals markets. The combined market value of key energy transition minerals, copper, lithium, nickel, cobalt, graphite and rare earth elements, more than doubles to reach USD 770 billion by 2040 in the NZE Scenario. At around USD 325 billion, today’s aggregate market value of key energy transition minerals aligns broadly with that of iron ore. By 2040, copper on its own attains that scale. The benefits of market expansion are shared across different regions, especially for mining. Latin America captures the largest amount of market value for mined output with around USD 120 billion by 2030. Indonesia sees the fastest growth, doubling its market value by 2030 due to its burgeoning nickel production. Africa witnesses a 65% increase in market value by 2030. Nearly 50% of the market value from refining is concentrated in China by 2030. China also sees a rise in market value for mined materials with its growing copper and lithium production. The recent fall in prices has affected investments in new mineral supply, but they are still growing. Increases in 2023 were smaller than those seen in 2022, but investment in critical mineral mining nonetheless grew by 10%. Investment by lithium specialists saw a sharp rise of 60%, despite weak prices. Exploration spending also rose by 15%, driven by Canada and Australia. Venture capital spending increased by 30%, with significant growth in battery recycling offsetting reduced investment in mining and refining start ups. China’s spending on and acquisition of overseas mines has grown significantly in the past ten years reaching record levels of USD 10 billion in the first half of 2023 with a particular focus on battery metals such as lithium, nickel and cobalt. Our projections show a mixed picture for future supply demand balances. Based on a detailed review of all announced projects, we have constructed two supply scenarios. The base case includes production from existing assets and those under construction, along with projects that have a high chance of moving ahead. The high production case adds in projects, which are at a reasonably advanced stage of development, seeking financing and/or permits. Using the APS as a benchmark, the situation in 2035 looks as follows. There is a significant gap between prospective supply and demand for copper and lithium: Anticipated mine supply from announced projects meets only 70% of copper and 50% of lithium requirements. Balances for nickel and cobalt look tight relative to confirmed projects, but better if prospective projects are included . Graphite and rare earth elements may not face supply volume issues but are among the most problematic in terms of market concentration: over 90% of battery grade graphite and 77% of refined rare earths in 2030 originate from China. The NZE Scenario necessitates further project developments across most minerals. Our analysis of announced projects shows limited progress in diversifying supply. The geographical concentration of mining operations is set to rise further or remain high over the projection period in the base case. The situation improves somewhat in the high production case, indicating that many potential projects being developed in geographically diverse regions are not among the front runners for development. For refined materials, the shares of the top three producing nations have all increased since 2020, with the trend most pronounced for nickel and cobalt. Announced projects indicate that refined material production is set to remain highly concentrated in a few countries. Between now and 2030, some 70 75% of projected supply growth for refined lithium, nickel, cobalt and rare earth elements comes from today’s top three producers. For battery grade spherical and synthetic graphite, almost 95% of growth comes from China. These high levels of supply concentration represent a risk for the speed of energy transitions, as it makes supply chains and routes more vulnerable to disruption, whether from extreme weather, trade disputes or geopolitics. Analysis based on asset ownership reveals a slightly different picture. The concentration in the mining sector looks different if viewed through the lens of asset ownership, with US and European companies playing a major role for copper and lithium supplies whereas Chinese companies have a greater role for nickel and cobalt production, despite these minerals being mined elsewhere . High market concentration means there is a risk of significant shortfalls in supply if, for any reason, supply from the largest producing country is interrupted. This “N 1” analysis is a typical measure of the resilience of any system and reveals significant vulnerabilities. If the largest supplier and its demand is excluded, then available ”N 1” supply of all key energy transition minerals would fall significantly below material requirements. The situation is most pronounced for graphite where the available “N 1” supply covers only 10% of the N 1 material requirements , significantly below the minimum non single origin threshold of 35% proposed in the EU Critical Raw Materials Act. This indicates that without urgent efforts to expedite the development of projects, achieving announced diversification goals will be highly challenging. Today’s price declines are a double edged sword , a boon for clean energy deployment but a bane for critical mineral investment and diversification. Lower prices have been good news for consumers and for affordability, bringing clean technology costs back on a downward trajectory, including the 14% reduction in battery prices in 2023. However, falling prices also make spending to ensure reliable and diversified supply less appealing to investors. This price effect has had the biggest consequences in new and emerging resource holders in the case of nickel, three quarters of operating or potential projects that are at risk are outside the top three producers. Our first of its kind risk assessment reveals potential areas of weakness for each mineral in supporting energy transition goals. The Outlook includes a new risk assessment framework for key energy transition minerals, across four major dimensions , supply risks, geopolitical risks, barriers to respond to supply disruptions, and exposure to environmental, social and governance  and climate risks. Overall, lithium and graphite show the highest risk scores. Lithium and copper are more exposed to supply and volume risks whereas graphite, cobalt, rare earths and nickel face more substantial geopolitical risks. Most minerals are exposed to high environmental risks. For example, today’s refining operations occur in places where grids tend to have a higher carbon intensity, relying mostly on coal based electricity. Some USD 800 billion of investment in mining is required to get on track for a 1,5 °C scenario to 2040. In the APS, approximately USD 590 billion is required over the same period. These increases need to be made in a way that fosters a more diversified array of supply sources in the future. Financing diversified critical mineral supply chains faces numerous challenges, such as cost inflation, long term price uncertainty and limited value placed on diversification by consumers. This requires specific policy measures to reinforce the investment case for supply chain diversification. Enhancing market transparency can also help, from pricing, with benefits to be drawn from efficient price discovery mechanisms and financial tools to hedge risks , to information, with a strong need for increasing the availability of reliable data on consumption, supply and trade. Stepping up efforts to recycle, innovate and encourage behavioural change is vital to ease potential strains on supply. In the case of lithium, the combination of right sizing EV batteries, alternative chemistries and recycling could reduce demand by 25% in 2030 in the NZE Scenario, saving an amount roughly equivalent to today’s production. Recycling rates for many materials have exhibited limited growth in the past. In the NZE Scenario, however, this needs to change, with growing policy attention to stepping up rates of collection and reprocessing. Recycled quantities of copper and cobalt could reduce 2040 primary supply requirements by 30%, and 15% for lithium and nickel. Without the uptake of recycling and reuse, mining capital requirements would need to be one third higher. New supplies must not come at the cost of local communities or the environment. Our systematic ESG performance tracking paints a mixed picture. The industry is making progress on worker safety, gender balance, community investment and renewable energy uses, but the same cannot be said for waste generation, emissions and water consumption and discharge, suggesting ample scope for improvement. The benefits associated with mineral production, such as revenue and jobs, have to be felt by producer countries and communities. Voluntary sustainability standards can help actors improve ESG performance, but greater transparency, due dilligence, harmonised approaches to credibility and appropriate incentives are needed to tap their full potential. After the relentless surge in prices since 2021, the critical minerals market underwent another tumultuous year in 2023. Prices for most materials experienced a significant decline, relinquishing most of the increases accumulated over the past two years. Prices for battery metals saw particularly steep reductions due to an inventory overhang in the downstream sector, a slight easing in the pace of demand growth and an increase in overall supply. While immediate concerns appear to have eased, the risks of market tightness and price volatility remain ever present as countries pursue decarbonisation goals. Moreover, the geopolitical context is increasingly complex, highlighted by a series of trade restriction measures in 2023, including gallium, germanium, graphite and technologies related to rare earth elements. Low material prices helped to put the costs of clean energy technologies back on a downward trajectory, but they present a challenge for efforts to diversify supply, given the financial difficulties that they pose for new and emerging producers. The imperative to bolster the diversity and resilience of critical mineral supplies remains at the top of the policy agenda. In line with new mandates approved by the 2024 Ministerial meeting, the IEA has been working together with countries and industry to address these emerging challenges and ensure reliable and sustainable supplies of critical minerals. On 28 September 2023, the IEA hosted the first ever Critical Minerals and Clean Energy Summit at the IEA headquarters in Paris. Almost 50 countries, including key producing and consuming nations around the world, came together with around 40 business leaders, investors, heads of international organisations and civil society organisations to share their experiences and discuss effective courses of action to ensure rapid and secure energy transitions. Chief among various desired actions was the need for robust market monitoring and outlooks that can help bring a clear understanding of today’s market situation and anticipate potential risks in the medium to long term. Earlier in 2023, the Group of Seven  ministers asked the IEA to play a strengthened role in safeguarding minerals security in its G7 Five Point Plan, through producing medium and long term outlooks for critical minerals and introducing the IEA Voluntary Critical Minerals Security Programme. This report, following the inaugural Critical Minerals Market Review 2023, responds to these growing needs for enhanced market transparency by reviewing latest market movements, examining the prospects for future mineral demand and supply, and assessing potential risks along the supply chain of key commodities. The Stated Policies Scenario  provides a sense of the prevailing direction of travel for the energy system, based today’s policy settings. The STEPS is associated with a temperature rise of 2,4 °C in 2100 . The Announced Pledges Scenario  assumes that governments will meet, in full and on time, all of the climaterelated commitments that they have announced, including longer term net zero emissions targets and pledges in nationally determined contributions . The APS is associated with a temperature rise of 1,7 °C in 2100 . The Net Zero Emissions by 2050  Scenario charts a pathway for the global energy sector to achieve net zero CO2 emissions by 2050 and limit the global temperature rise to 1,5 °C above pre industrial levels in 2100  with limited overshoot. The NZE Scenario also meets the key energy related UN Sustainable Development Goals  such as universal access to reliable modern energy services and major improvements in air quality. Global clean energy deployment scaled new heights in 2023, with annual additions of solar PV growing 85% and wind turbines growing 60%. The growth in clean energy deployment, however, remains concentrated in advanced economies and the People’s Republic of China , with most developing economies lagging behind. Global solar PV capacity additions for electricity generation broke a new record, reaching 420 GW in 2023. Solar PV alone accounted for three quarters of renewable capacity additions worldwide. China alone accounted for 62% of the increase in global solar PV capacity. Despite the phase out of central government subsidies, the country commissioned as much solar PV in 2023 as the entire world did in 2022. In the European Union , annual solar PV additions rose by a quarter and reached a record level 52 GW in 2023. Following the Russian Federation’s  invasion of Ukraine, the EU member states improved the policy environment to accelerate renewables deployment, in part to help bring down natural gas consumption. This has led annual solar PV additions to double since 2021. In the United States , solar PV capacity additions increased 50% year on year following the easing of supply chain issues that slowed deployment in 2022. Federal tax incentives and state level support have continued to drive both utility scale and rooftop solar PV applications. India added only 12 GW of solar PV in 2023, one third lower than in 2022. Nevertheless, in 2023 the government unveiled an objective to conduct annual auctions for 50 GW of renewable energy capacity that promises to accelerate deployment significantly. Global wind capacity additions jumped by 60% in 2023 to break the record seen in 2020. Onshore wind projects accounted for over 85% of global wind deployment in 2023. China accounted for more than 60% of global wind expansion as the country almost doubled its additions compared with 2022. In the European Union, wind additions increased by less than 10% in 2023, with onshore wind deployment slowing down. Developers have been facing multiple challenges, including rising equipment costs, inflation, and supply chain constraints, which have made them less eager to participate in competitive auctions. Most countries in Europe have introduced policies to address the challenges posed by slow and complex permitting procedures for wind projects. However, the impact of these policies will take time to be visible in deployment trends. In the United States, wind additions declined by more than a quarter in 2023. This was mainly due to prior uncertainty over the future of tax credits, prior to the adoption of the Inflation Reduction Act . Wind capacity additions are expected to increase significantly in the coming years thanks to the policy visibility provided by the IRA. In India, a larger number of projects awarded in previous years led annual deployment to increase by almost 50% in 2023. Offshore wind growth has recovered from a major drop seen in annual additions in 2022. However, the offshore industry outside of China is facing challenges with investment costs today more than 20% higher than a few years ago. In 2023, developers cancelled or postponed 15 GW of offshore wind projects in the United States and the United Kingdom because pricing for previously awarded capacity no longer reflected prevailing project development costs. Overall, the world is poised for a signficant acceleration in renewable capacity in the coming years driven by supportive policies in more than 130 countries. Renewables are expected to surpass coal to become the largest source of electricity generation by the mid 2020s. Substantial demand for materials such as copper, silicon and rare earth elements will be required to support the rapid deployment of renewable generation capacity. However, challenges such as high interest rates and low profitability persist. Policymakers need to address issues related to permitting and grid expansion to achieve the target of tripling global renewable capacity by 2030 that was agreed at the 28th Conference of the Parties . The growing markets for eletrolysers could push up demand for nickel, platinum group metals, zirconium and other minerals depending on the specific technology deployed. In 2023, global installed capacity of electrolysers for hydrogen production reached 1,3 GW, underpinned by a surge in annual additions to 600 MW. However, this is still far from the annual multi gigawatt additions required to keep global climate goals within reach. From less than 10% of global installed capacity in 2020, China has emerged as the leading region since 2021, reaching an installed capacity of more than 650 MW by the end of 2023. China now represents close to half of the global installed capacity. This transformation has been fuelled by the scaling up of project sizes by Chinese developers, with several projects now exceeding 100 MW in capacity. Consequently, China now hosts six of the world's largest operational electrolysis projects. The European Union accounted for around a third of global installed capacity in 2020, but has now ceded its leading position, with additions of around 70 MW in 2023. The United States emerged as the third largest market, with additions exceeding 30 MW. Demand uncertainty and lack of regulatory clarity, coupled with recent challenges such as inflation and slow implementation of support mechanisms are hindering faster adoption of electrolysers in other regions. Electric car sales neared 14 million in 2023, a 35% year on year increase, and more than six times higher than five years earlier in 2018. Electric cars accounted for 18% of all car sales in 2023 up from 14% in 2022 and only 2% five years earlier, and nearly 95% of all sales were in China, Europe and the United States. These trends demonstrate robust growth in electric car markets as they become more mature, even if the growth in global electric car sales slowed somewhat compared with the 60% seen in 2022. China is the world's largest electric car market with 8,1 million electric car sales and 60% of the global total in 2023, a share that has been increasing, up from 50% five years earlier in 2018. In 2023 more than one in three new car registrations in China was electric. The growth rate of electric car sales in China more than halved in 2023 to 35% from 80% in 2022. One of the critical reasons for this is that 2023 was the first year that the government provided no purchase subsidies for electric cars, with their phase out in 2022. Therefore, a slowdown of electric car sales was expected. This is also coupled with relatively weak consumer sentiment. As the Chinese market matures, the industry is entering a phase of price competition and consolidation. To mitigate lower domestic demand, China exported 1,2 million electric vehicles  in 2023, an 80% increase from the previous year, with primary export markets being Europe and the Asia Pacific region including Thailand and Australia. In April, China removed down payment requirements for new car loans in an effort to stimulate consumer demand. In the first quarter of 2024 the year on year electric car sales growth rate in China increased to 36% compared with 27% in the same period last year. It is estimated that around 45% of all cars sold in China in 2024 could be electric. Europe is the second largest electric car market with almost 25% of global sales in 2023, reaching 3,2 million electric car sales. This year more than one in five cars sold in Europe was electric. Unlike China, Europe did not experience a slowdown as the growth rate of electric car sales slightly accelerated in 2023 to 20%, up from 15% in 2022. However, sales trends differed by country. In Germany the electric car sales share fell from 30% in 2022 to 25% in 2023 due to the sudden end of all EV subsidies in 2023, which were originally intended to apply until the end of 2024. Nevertheless, in the rest of Europe electric car sales shares increased, with the Netherlands reaching 30%, the United Kingdom and France 25%, and Sweden 60%. In the United States electric car sales grew to 1,4 million in 2023, increasing by 40% compared with 2022, the fastest growth rate of the three largest regions, though the sales share of electric cars reached only 10%. The United States experienced a slight slowdown compared with the 55% rise in 2022, but growth in sales remained strong, with the IRA having supported sales despite some concerns about domestic component requirements hindering deployment. The revision of eligibility criteria for IRA tax credits in 2023 meant several popular vehicles were covered, and the Tesla Model Y increased its sales by 50% year on year. In 2024 new guidance significantly reduced the number of eligible vehicles for tax credits. In the rest of the world, total electric car sales grew by 70% and sales almost reached 1 million electric cars. India experienced 70% year on year growth, with sales of 80 000 vehicles, compared with just 10% growth for total car sales. In Thailand electric car sales increased more than fourfold, reaching 90 000 vehicles and a 10% market share, a particularly impressive achievement given that total car sales decreased from 2022 to 2023. Subsidies in both regions have facilitated demand growth though India is anticipated to reduce subsidy levels in 2024. In both China and the United States, sales of plug in hybrid electric vehicles  grew significantly faster than battery electric vehicles  . As a result, the share of PHEVs in EV sales reached 33% in China, up from 25% in 2022, and 20% in the United States. Concerns about driving range and lack of sufficient charging infrastructure for BEVs appear to be the driving force. In China, this surge in PHEV demand suggest that the growing middle class appear to be more concerned about range going forward, marking a break from the past where relatively low range BEVs were popular. The average battery size for PHEVs in China is around 50% higher than in Europe. A recent trend in China has been towards extended range EVs , which have an electric powertrain but also have a combustion engine able to recharge the battery. EREVs have a battery around twice the size of a typical PHEV, enabling real world electric range of around 150 km, more than double that of conventional PHEVs. In 2023 EREVs accounted for a quarter of Chinese PHEV sales, a 10% increase from 2022, although EREVs have a negligible sale share outside of China. Europe, however, saw significantly higher growth in BEV sales with over 30% growth year on year compared with a small drop in PHEV sales in 2023. Although growth rates in EV sales are slowing, early signs from 2024 indicated that sales remain generally strong. As the market matures and subsidies are phased out, growth rates may decrease somewhat. However, robust growth in EV sales is still expected to continue in the near and long term, supported by ongoing policy momentum, major increases in manufacturing capacity, cost declines and expanded adoption in developing economies. In 2023, global battery demand from EVs and storage reached 865 GWh in 2023, a 45% year on year increase. This was primarily driven by sales of electric cars, which were responsible for 85% of global demand. The annual growth rate for battery demand from electric cars, buses and trucks slowed in 2023 to 40%, compared with 75% in 2022, in line with broader sales trends, although annual demand growth from two or three wheelers increased. Battery storage demand experienced the most impressive rise, more than doubling from the 2022 level, bringing its share in total EV and storage demand up to 10%. Given that growth rates for battery storage had almost doubled in 2021, this represents a remarkable surge in utility scale and behind the metre storage deployment. China was the largest source of battery demand in 2023 with 55% of the global total, followed by Europe with around a quarter and the United States with 15%, in each case dominated by EV sales. Battery demand in China grew by over 40% in 2023 this was half the rate seen in 2023 despite a threefold rise in demand for storage deployment. Battery demand in Europe and the United States both grew by 45%, a higher rate than for electric car sales due to a combination of larger vehicle and battery sizes and higher rates of storage deployment. Alongside sales, the rise in battery sizes for EVs is a critical driver of growth in demand for batteries and for critical minerals. In most regions the average battery size for passenger BEVs has been increasing year on year, with the global average increasing more than 60% since 2017. The trend towards an increasing share of sport utility vehicles  found in conventional car markets is being replicated in the EV market. Automakers are focusing on larger vehicles, which are typically more profitable, and consumers appear to have a strong appetite for larger vehicles and ranges, even if they are often beyond their requirements. All regions follow the same overall trend for increased battery sizes, but there are significant regional variations in absolute values. The average battery size in the United States is 30% larger than the global average, Europe is 10% larger while China is 10% smaller. This mirrors size trends in conventional vehicle sectors, and also shows the greater preference from consumers in the United States and Europe for higher range EVs. Battery pack price trends In 2023 average battery pack prices dropped 14% to a record low of USD 139/kWh. This was the largest price decrease since 2018, driven primarily by the fall in critical minerals prices, in combination with a surge in battery production capacity and slightly weaker demand than expected. This reinstates the trend of declining battery prices that was temporarily reversed in 2022 due to the exceptionally high prices of battery critical minerals. Cells now account for 80% of the total pack price, an increasing ratio partly due to the cell to pack  design innovation reducing dead weight in the pack and pack costs. With decreasing manufacturing costs from economies of scale and innovation, critical minerals have been a growing share of the battery pack cost, leaving the battery pack price more susceptible to mineral price volatility. This was seen clearly in 2022 when cathode raw materials peaked at 30% of the total pack price before falling back to to 25% in 2023. Battery chemistry trends One of the most remarkable developments in the global battery sector in the last five years has been the resurgence of the lithium iron phosphate  cathode chemistry. With a lower energy density but more stable and lower cost chemistry compared to the nickel based chemistries, LFP was being phased out in favour of the significantly higher energy density nickel based cathode chemistries. However, there has been a remarkable reversal of fortune since 2019. The fact that LFP contains no nickel or cobalt became an important asset that helped reduced exposure to high commodity prices. In addition, the emergence of CTP technology eliminated dead weight in the battery pack and enhanced the energy density of LFP. CTP was pioneered by BYD with the Blade battery. LFP has now become a major chemistry in 2023 with around 40% of electric car battery sales by capacity. Due to favourable patent agreements China had been the only country producing LFP batteries after 2010. However, the patents expired in 2022, which kick started production plans outside China. Nevertheless, there are still major regional differences, less than 10% of total EV sales by capacity in the United States and Europe are LFP while two thirds are LFP in China. Another major recent innovation was the first fast charging LFP battery, Shenxing developed by CATL, capable of delivering 400km of range from a ten minute charge. This is achieved through a new electrolyte and graded anode porosities among other innovations. The novel fast charging LFP battery will be utilised in EV vehicles this year, significantly increasing the attractiveness of LFP chemistries. The other significant recent LFP innovation is the development and commercialisation of lithium manganese iron phosphate , the upgraded version of LFP including manganese which increases its energy density. With CATL’s M3P battery confirmed for use in six Chinese EV models and undergoing validation by Tesla for its Chinese Model 3, it is anticipated that LMFP will continue to take market share from nickel based chemistries due to its increased range. In terms of the anode, silicon doped graphite anodes are increasing in market share with almost a third of electric car anode capacity market share. Higher fractions of silicon are also being used with 10% silicon graphite anodes doubling in market share in 2023 to 12%. Silicon doping increases the energy density of the graphite anode, and increased doping and higher quantities of silicon are expected in the near future. Looking beyond lithium ion chemistries, sodium ion  batteries have experenced a surge of development in recent years, especially while lithium prices were high. As the name suggests, this chemistry contains no lithium and also requires less critical minerals than lithium ion batteries. Leading batterymakers including CATL, Northvolt and many others announced their sodium ion cells. However, the fall in lithium prices has diminished the advantage of sodium ion chemistries and major ramping up plans have stalled or been delayed. The progress of sodium ion batteries hinges on their price advantage over lithium ion, with major influence of the lithium price. All solid state batteries  are the anticipated step change technology for battery energy density and safety. There has been widespread industrial research and development in recent years, yet major technical challenges remain such as the typically high pressures required to ensure good electrode contact or relying on difficult to scale, expensive production processes. Progress has been made utilising hybrid solid liquid electrolyte batteries, for instance from CATL and Quantumscape however, the use of an organic liquid electrolyte diminishes any safety advantage and may even have higher risks than conventional lithium ion batteries due to the use of lithium metal. Progress is also being made with ASSBs, with Samsung, an industry leader in solid state, recently announcing plans for mass production in 2027. CATL also expects to produce small scale production in the same year. Though ASSBs hold potential in the future, they are not expected to have significant impact until after 2030. One of the most critical considerations in the global battery outlook is the strength of manufacturing capacity in China. China dominates the downstream battery supply chain, including processing of the battery minerals, cathode and anode material production, and battery cell and EV production. China holds 85% of battery cell production capacity and 90% of cathode and 98% of anode material production capacity globally. Over half of global processing for lithium and cobalt occurs in China. The country dominates the entire graphite anode supply chain end to end. China also produces two thirds of the world's EVs. In almost all stages of the midstream and downstream supply chain, China has increased its market share since 2021. China has been building battery plants and cathode and anode production capacity at a speed that exceeds projected demand. In 2023 China’s maximum cell production capacity was more than double the amount needed to meet the country’s battery cell demand. For cathode active materials, the manufacturing capacity anticipated in 2030 is about two times greater than the projected battery cell manufacturing capacity in the same year. In the case of anode active materials, this ratio increases to five times greater, raising doubts about whether all cathode and anode material manufacturers will be able to remain competitive in the face of such a surplus. There are several reasons for China’s strong manufacturing position. The fruits of China’s industrial strategy have been seen already in many sectors including solar, aluminium and steel. Years of government support, alongside a large and growing domestic market, have meant that the EV and battery industries in China have thrived and gained global market share. This has now set the stage for considerable price competition and consolidation. High technology manufacturing is now a pivotal element of China’s strategy for growth. Ample manufacturing capacity across the battery supply chain is a double edged sword. If excess production is pushed on to export markets, battery prices and EV prices may fall, which may be good for consumers and thus support progress towards climate goals. However, it could make difficult for producers globally to compete, increasing the level of supply concentration and exposing the supply chains to various physical and geopolitical risks. For manufacturers in China in the coming years, the primary challenge will be to identify a sufficiently large export market to absorb their output and to improve low margins. Conversely, there is strong pressure on manufacturers in other regions such as the European Union and the United States to improve their cost competitiveness. The quality, cost and characteristics of cells and components provided by various suppliers, alongside local regulatory requirements and environmental, social and governance standards, will be crucial in determining how these markets develop. The battery storage market continued its remarkable growth in 2023, with installed capacity reaching over 85 GW. Almost half of this capacity, over 40 GW, was added in 2023 alone, another record year that saw additions doubling from 2022. A large part of the capacity growth has come from utility scale systems, with behind the metre  battery storage responsible for about 35% of the annual additions on average. The strong increase in capacity additions over the last few years has been driven almost entirely by China, the European Union and the United States, which collectively accounted for nearly 90% of the capacity added in 2023. The past two years have seen China rise above the United States to become the leading market for battery storage, with its share in annual global additions rising from around 20% in 2019 to 55% in 2023. In China, about two thirds of the additional capacity was utility scale, driven mainly by province level mandates that encourage the pairing of new solar PV or wind projects with energy storage. BTM storage capacity grew strongly as well, with larger scale commercial rather than residential users driving the uptake, underpinned by subsidies and a rising proliferation of time of use electricity tariffs. The United States remains the second largest battery storage market. Utility scale projects accounted for nearly 90% of the additional capacity, with California, Texas and other states in the Southwest leading deployments. Falling costs have allowed batteries to make inroads into ancillary service markets and they are increasingly tapped to provide balancing services and secure capacity in states with high shares of variable renewables. Installed battery storage capacity in the European Union grew 1,7 times in 2023, with annual additions rising to nearly 6 GW. Nearly 90% of the capacity growth was associated with BTM storage, mostly in Germany and Italy, where incentives such as tax breaks and low interest loans, as well as high retail electricity prices support the pairing of rooftop solar with storage. In 2023, around 80% of the rooftop solar installed in Germany and Italy came with storage. Capacity additions in Australia jumped to 1,3 GW in 2023, more than doubling last year’s deployment levels, thanks in part to financial incentives that encourage the pairing of residential PV systems with batteries. Utility scale battery storage capacity additions in Japan and Korea increased substantially in 2023, jumping to 400 MW in Japan and 300 MW in Korea. Chile, meanwhile, added nearly 250 MW of utility scale storage in 2023, making it the first country in Latin America to deploy battery storage at scale. In other regions, capacity additions have so far been limited. However, in addition to further rapid acceleration in today’s core markets, capacity growth is expected to broaden over the next few years. Energy storage targets and financial support mean that India in particular has significant potential to emerge as another large market for battery storage. Lithium ion batteries dominate the battery storage market today, accounting for more than 90% of the market. The chemistries available for lithium ion batteries used in storage applications are the same as the ones available for the EV market. However, storage applications have different technical needs than EVs, and characteristics such as cost, capacity to charge/discharge frequently, and lifetime are prioritised over energy density. This has led to a shift towards LFP batteries, which accounted for about 80% of the total battery storage market in 2023, up from about 65% in 2022. The growing battery market, together with the resurgence of LFP batteries for EV applications, is leading non Chinese battery manufacturers to develop their own LFP batteries, which today are almost exclusively produced in China. Lithium ion battery technology is set to remain a key part of short duration  storage, but alternative technologies  are being developed either to compete or to complement it. The critical minerals market had a turbulent year in 2023 and the main story of the year was falling prices. Battery minerals saw particularly large declines with lithium spot prices plummeting by 75% and other key materials such as nickel, cobalt, manganese, and graphite seeing declines of 30 45%. The IEA Energy Transition Mineral Price Index, which tracks a basket price of copper, major battery metals and rare earth elements, tripled in just two years starting in January 2020, but it began to slide from the beginning of 2023, returning to pre pandemic levels. However, except for cobalt and graphite, prices remain higher than the historical averages observed in the 2010s. In contrast, prices for copper stayed relatively resilient. While expectations for a strong post pandemic demand recovery did not materialise at scale, actual output fell short of anticipated supply, leading to tighter market conditions, particularly for copper concentrates. Several factors contributed to the drop in prices. The slowing growth rate of EV battery sales, coupled with large scale cell and cathode production, has led to a substantial accumulation of downstream products in inventory. China's expansion of battery plants, as well as cathode and anode production capacity, has far outpaced demand. This expansion has been a key driver behind the considerable build up of inventory throughout the supply chain, resulting in reduced purchases of new materials. Furthermore, amid record high prices in 2022, many downstream consumers also made efforts to secure ample volumes to ensure business continuity. The rate of demand growth remained robust in 2023, with lithium demand rising by 30% and demand for nickel, cobalt, graphite and rare earths expanding by 8 15%. Clean energy applications were one of the primary contributors to this demand growth. Across all key minerals, the share of clean energy technologies has risen consistently. EVs cemented their position as the largest consuming segment for lithium, and increased their share considerably in the demand for nickel, cobalt and graphite. Nonetheless, the ramp up of new supply outpaced demand growth in the past two years. From Africa to Indonesia, and to China, new projects came online relatively quickly, adding sizeable volumes to the supply pool. The remarkable increase in nickel supply from Indonesia is a notable example. Overall, a combination of demand and supply side trends, alongside a correction of overly steep price rises in 2021 22 contributed to the lower price environment, which is likely to continue in 2024. As a result, despite demand growth, the market size for energy transition minerals contracted by 10% to USD 325 billion in 2023. It would have been 20% higher if prices had remained at 2022 levels. Production of key energy transition minerals has expanded substantially over the past several years, easing concerns about near term supply shortages. However, as underscored already in the IEA’s first Critical Minerals Market Review in 2023, this growth has come with increasing levels of geographical concentration. While high levels of supply concentration are well known in the critical mineral space, the issue has been exacerbated by further production increases from today’s dominant suppliers. In the case of refined materials, the share of the top three producing nations have all increased since 2020, except for lithium. This trend is most pronounced for nickel and cobalt, where the rise of Indonesia has significantly boosted the level of supply concentration. Between 2020 and 2023, Indonesia's share of mined nickel production increased from 34% to 52% and its share of refined nickel increased from 23% to 37%. Meanwhile, 2023 also witnessed a proliferation of trade restriction measures, including increased Chinese controls over exports of gallium, germanium, graphite and technologies for processing rare earth elements. For mining, however, assessing production by ownership  shows a very different picture compared with the geographical mine location. Companies in the United States and Europe play a much greater role in the supply of all critical minerals than what the geographical location of mines may suggest. Much of this is from some of the largest multi national mining majors such as Glencore and Rio Tinto. Although the majority of copper production occurs in Chile, European companies are the leading copper producers with over 10% of production, with Glencore, Rio Tinto and Anglo American playing major roles, and US companies controlling the second largest amount of production. For lithium, Australia and Chile are the primary locations of raw material production, whereas US companies such as Abermarle are a major shareholder of over 40% of producing mines. Both nickel and cobalt also show stark differences between the geographical location of mines compared with the ownership. Although Indonesia is the leading location of nickel mining, Indonesian companies hold less than 10% of production. Chinese companies are the major nickel mine owners, accounting for around 40% of production. European companies also have a sizeable share with over 20% of supply, predominantly due to operations in Indonesia owned by Eramet. For cobalt, the majority of mines are located in the Democratic Republic of the Congo , whereas European companies such as Glencore and Chinese companies such as CMOC own a third each of the supply. Notably, DRC owned companies account for less than 5% of production. Demand for refined copper increased by 2,7% in 2023, up from 0,9% in 2022, almost entirely driven by growing consumption in China and India. Demand in other regions registered a modest decline. The growth in China was predominantly underpinned by copper uses in construction and electricity networks, a trend expected to persist in the coming years. Indications from China's 'Two Sessions' meeting in March 2024 signal a continued emphasis on expanding copper usage, particularly in renewable energy and grid expansion. Mined copper output saw an increase of less than 2% in 2023, with notable growth in the Democratic Republic of the Congo  and Peru offset by declines in Chile and elsewhere. Refined copper supply expanded by 4% in 2023, primarily driven by increased production in China, with some contributions from the DRC. In early 2024, copper prices saw a strong increase as lower than anticipated mined output tipped the concentrate market balance toward a slight deficit, contrary to earlier expectations of surpluses. The closure of the Cobre Panama mine and downgraded production guidance by Anglo American, Vale and Southern Copper contributed to this result. Several supply disruptions are continuing in 2024, for example, production at the Radomiro Tomic mine in Chile was halted due to a worker strike in March. As many smelters sought to secure copper concentrates, the spot treatment and refining charges  plummeted by 80% between October 2023 and February 2024. In response, Chinese smelters agreed on several measures to limit the decline in TC/RCs, including replacing concentrate usage with scrap, bringing forward the schedule for maintenance, reducing utilisation rates for unprofitable facilities and postponing new projects. The tightness in the concentrate markets extended to the scrap market as many smelters sought to increase their usage of scrap to complement concentrates. Over recent months, there has been a noticeable uptick in China's scrap imports, with repercussions in the global scrap market. Limited growth in mined supply is anticipated for 2024. However, in 2025 and 2026, several new projects and expansion plans are expected to ramp up, such as Tenke Fungurume , Quebrada Blanca Phase 2  and Udokan . These would bring additional volumes to the market but risks remain if these projects fail to meet expected growth targets or experience slower ramp ups. Possible sanctions on Russian copper may not materially affect the market as many European companies have already diversified their supplies and a large portion of Russian volumes currently flow to China and Türkiye. In 2023, lithium demand rose by around 30%, maintaining the level of growth seen in 2022. Raw material supply increased by 30% with traditional producers such as Australia and Chile being joined by new players such as Argentina and Zimbabwe. Lithium chemical production experienced even greater expansion by 40%, primarily driven by China. Lithium was a notable beneficiary during the price rally in 2021 and early 2022, but in 2023 it was the commodity that was most affected by price downturns. The substantial build up of inventories in the downstream battery value chain  progressively dampened purchasing activity in 2023. Meanwhile new supplies from Australia, Argentina and China continued to increase throughout the year, further pressuring prices. Lithium prices fell by over 75% during the course of 2023, returning to pre pandemic levels. This steep decline prompted various actions by producers to reduce output and scale back expansion plans. Core Lithium decided to suspend mining operations at its Finniss mine to focus on processing stockpiled ore. Albemarle outlined plans to reduce capital expenditures for 2024 while implementing cost cutting measures. Talison announced a production reduction plan in response to market conditions. Lithium prices saw a slight uptick in March April 2024, supported by production cuts and expectations for the end of the destocking cycle. The revival of downstream activities may provide some upside for prices. However, a significant price surge in the near term is difficult to envision. Several potential supply sources stand ready to ramp up production, which could cap the potential for a substantial price increase. For example, it is estimated that lepidolite assets in China currently runs at 40% utilisation rates but could return to the market if prices were to rise substantially in the short term. Additionally, spodumene assets in China, Canada, Brazil and Africa are also positioned for robust growth. On the chemical front, numerous lithium refineries are scheduled to commence operations and expand capacity in 2024 and 2025, primarily in Argentina, Australia and China. Most of the recently announced supply reductions or postponements have been associated with hard rock lithium, not chemicals. While investment and exploration activities in the lithium sector remained strong in 2023, the enduring low prices may dampen investment appetite for new greenfield projects, thereby impacting medium to long term market balances. Nickel Nickel was another material that experienced significant price declines, with prices falling more than 40% in 2023. Several factors, including a downstream inventory overhang, the accelerated adoption of LFP chemistries, and subdued stainless steel demand, particularly in advanced economies, contributed to this downturn. However, the primary driver was oversupply, driven by a surge in output from Indonesia. While demand for nickel grew by 4% in 2022 and 8% in 2023, mined nickel supply increased by 19% in 2022 and 9% in 2023. In 2023, Indonesia’s production growth was greater than global output growth, implying reduced output from other producers. Refined nickel production expanded by 14% in 2022 and 2023 each, again led by Indonesia and China. The delivery of high pressure acid leaching  projects in Indonesia, aimed at producing high purity nickel products from laterite resources, exceeded initial projections in terms of speed. Indonesia's HPAL projects yielded 180 kt of nickel in 2023, a significant rise from 88 kt in 2022. The development of a process to convert nickel pig iron  to nickel matte further contributed to notable output growth in the country. In recent years, the proliferation of methods to convert low purity Class II products and intermediates has blurred the traditional boundary between Class I and Class II products, contributing to a decline in nickel prices on the London Metal Exchange  where high purity Class I products are traded. With the notable discounts of nickel sulphate and NPI to the LME price, several producers in China  have begun producing higher grade nickel cathodes suitable for delivery on both the LME and Shanghai Future Exchange . In July 2023, Huayou’s nickel products were accepted by the LME, and other nickel sulphate producers such as China’s GEM and CNGR are following suit. Overall, the oversupply of Class II and intermediates in Indonesia and China and mechanisms to bring the surplus of Class II products to the Class I market coincided with weak demand, causing a sharp correction in prices. These market conditions have taken a heavy toll on many higher cost producers, prompting them to temporarily suspend production or, in some cases, cease operations. Panoramic Resources made the decision to halt operations at its Savannah nickel mine in West Australia. BHP is reassessing its Nickel West operations and planned investments for the West Musgrave project in Australia. This has sparked discussions about price premiums for nickel products with high environmental and social performance. However, there are limited indications thus far that consumers favour products with lower environmental and social impacts . In 2023, the nickel market saw a surplus equivalent to around 8% of annual consumption. While the magnitude of this surplus may diminish in 2024 due to growing demand and production cuts, prices could remain suppressed given the numerous projects in the pipeline, particularly those slated to come online in Indonesia in 2024 and beyond. Indonesia's share of global nickel supply has risen significantly, climbing from 34% in 2020 to 52% in 2023 for mined output and from 23% in 2020 to 37% in 2023 for refined output. The persistent low price environment may further bolster this share in the years ahead. Cobalt Cobalt prices remained subdued throughout 2023 due to a combination of production growth from the DRC and Indonesia coinciding with weak demand. Over the past two years, demand for cobalt has increased by 8 10% annually, while mined cobalt supply expanded by an average of 16% and refined cobalt supply by 13%. In 2023, prices for cobalt metal performed better than those for cobalt sulphate, signalling weaker demand in the battery sector compared with demand for alloys and magnets. The DRC, the largest supplier with a 65% market share, delivered the largest increase in production in 2023. The ramp up of CMOC’s Kisanfu mine in the DRC exceeded expectations from the industry, and the resolution of the dispute between DRC’s state owned mining company Gécamines and China’s CMOC allowed the Tenke Fungurume mine to resume exports. Consequently, CMOC surpassed Glencore as the largest supplier of mined cobalt to the global market. Indonesia rapidly ascended to become the second largest producer, driven by the burgeoning production of mixed hydroxide precipitate  from its HPAL facilities. For refined cobalt, China has dominated production volume growth over the past few years, with virtually no growth observed in other regions. Subdued prices prompted many producers to stockpile cobalt hydroxide or metal in an effort to bolster future profitability, though the effectiveness of these measures hinges on the evolution of near term market balances. Cobalt prices are expected to remain subdued in 2024 as supply growth continues to outpace demand growth. While overall battery deployment continues to increase, the trend in battery chemistry choices is shifting towards those using less cobalt. Although the pace of supply growth is anticipated to slow in 2024, significant price support in the near term is unlikely, although logistical bottlenecks or unexpected supply disruptions of large mines could trigger a brief price rally. Graphite In 2023, graphite consumption grew by 11% to 4,6 Mt, with battery related demand growing by 40% to 1,5 Mt. Mining production of natural graphite has been stable, while synthetic production continued to ramp up, allowing total graphite supply to grow by 10,5% and reach 5,5 Mt. Production is ramping up in more diversified areas, such as the Lac des Îles mine coming back online in Quebec, and production starting in Madagscar’s Molo mine. New developments are taking place with more integrated models, with anode producers building increasingly intregrated supply chains , such as Korea’s POSCO securing supply of 24 kt per year from the Balama mine in Mozambique, whose owner is also developing anode material production in Louisiana. As for other key battery metals, graphite prices experienced a significant drop in prices over the course of 2023 with prices for natural flake graphite falling by 30% and spherical graphite by 45%. One of the most significant developments for graphite this year is that since December 2023, natural and refined battery grade graphite are subject to export controls from China. These are not the first set of Chinese export controls for critical minerals, with restrictive measures taken for rare earth elements in the early 2010s and for gallium and germanium since July 2023, but it is the first time these happened for a critical input of the EV supply chain. In January and February 2024, exports to Japan and Korea , key EV anode producers outside of China , were significantly below average although they returned to normal levels in March. In parallel, new US IRA guidance is creating incentives for a number of battery manufacturers to source graphite from outside of China. While the market is well supplied for the moment, this raises an important question about the availability of graphite that is compliant with a range of policy measures aimed at promoting supply chain diversification. It remains to be seen whether market fragmentation creates divergent regional price dynamics going forward. The rare earth elements  industry is still bearing the legacy of concerns around risk and volatility which emerged during the 2010 2011 price spike. Over several decades, China has built its position in the REE market with the long term goal of growing its downstream industry and has become the leader in refined rare earth technologies . The REE market is fundamentally driven by developments in China, which is the single largest source of mined rare earths from two principal areas. The largest source of light rare earths  including neodymium and praseodymium, is a by product supply from the Bayan Obo iron mine in Inner Mongolia. But China also hosts vast quantities of heavy rare earths  including dysprosium and terbium, in ionic adsorption clay deposits in southern China. With additional mine supply spread across the country, China is the largest producer of mined REEs. The supply chain for REEs and permanent magnets is complex, regionally concentrated and marked by a lack of transparent pricing. In 2023, the REE markets saw an oversupply from China and a lower than expected downstream demand. Chinese production quotas for LREEs increased modestly in the second half of 2023, raising the availability of materials in the market. Neodymium prices are estimated to have fallen by 45% over the course of 2023. Net profit for the China Northern Rare Earth Group, one of the largest global producers, was estimated to be in the range of CNY 2,17 billion   to CNY 2,33 billion in 2023, a decline of around 60% from CNY 5,98 billion  in 2022. As China imports HREE feedstock from Myanmar and Laos for domestic processing, Myanmar's decision to close its borders raised concerns about the reliable supply of HREEs. However, the latest data indicates that the closures had little impact on trade flows. REE mining activity mainly occurs in Kachin state, which has significant autonomy. Meanwhile, there was an increasing volume of HREE feedstock from Lao PDR to China, which also contributed to alleviating concerns about material availability. While the markets appear to be well supplied to meet near term demand, the current low price environments could delay projects planned outside China, further pushing back already lengthy lead time projects intended to boost diversification. Another area of concern could be tightened supply of HREEs in the medium term. While a lot of attention was paid in the last decade to LREEs used in EV motor magnets , HREEs such as dysprosium and terbium are also key components, but their relative supply from the main rare earth deposits is not in sync with their use. Avoiding this would require all currently announced projects to secure funding and scale up rapidly. Concerns surrounding transparent reporting in rare earth markets also need to be addressed to avoid situations such as the recent legal action against major players in Viet Nam, which could put expected supplies at risk or create barriers for diversification. After a decade of slow deployment, a changing policy landscape is creating opportunities for a nuclear comeback. Nuclear power capacity increases from 420 GW in 2023 to 500 GW by 2030 and 770 GW by 2050 in the Announced Pledges Scenario , with growth mainly in China and other developing economies, while advanced economies carry out lifetime extensions and look to builld new projects to offset retirements. Large scale reactors remain the dominant form, but growing interest in small modular reactors increases the potential for nuclear power in the long run. After climbing steadily for a couple of years, spot prices for uranium oxide spiked in the second half of 2023, reaching over USD 100 per pound in February 2024, the highest price seen in over 15 years, before falling again to just under USD 90 in March. Amid ongoing uncertainty over the possibility of import restrictions from the United States and European countries on supplies from Russia, news in 2023 of a coup in Niger and a sulphuric acid shortage in Kazakhstan put pressure on supplies of uranium oxides. While the current price spikes are not entirely supported by market fundamentals given that many countries have sizeable stockpiles for nuclear fuels and it will take many years for planned nuclear capacities to come online, the recent price rally highlights a growing concern around uranium supplies to support the growth of nuclear power. Following the invasion of Ukraine, Western governments have become increasingly concerned about Russia’s role in the nuclear fuel supply chain. In recent years, Russia has accounted for a third of all conversion and 40% of enrichment services globally. Russia is also the only commercial supplier of high assay low enriched uranium  necessary for certain advanced reactor designs. Several governments have recently announced moves to reduce dependence on Russia. In January 2023, the US Department of Energy announced awards to the conversion industry to develop its strategic uranium reserve. In April 2023, Canada, France, Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States announced an agreement to support the stable supply of nuclear fuel and “undermine Russia’s grip” on nuclear fuel supply chains. Since then, the United Kingdom and the United States have announced moves to encourage the development of HALEU enrichment capacity. Nonetheless, it is too early to tell if high prices and supply supports seen in 2023 will be sufficient to encourage Western suppliers to expand production. US domestic production of uranium in 2023 remained at historically low levels. However, some producers in Canada and the United States have announced that they will restart production in 2024 at previously mothballed facilities. Lower prices have contributed to cost reductions for a number of clean energy technologies, although they were not the only factor. Substantial increases in manufacturing capacity, especially in China, have also driven a decrease in prices of clean energy equipment in 2023. Following two years of rise, IEA’s global Clean Energy Equipment Price Index  reveals that prices eased considerably during 2023, with the fourth quarter of 2023 reaching the index’s lowest level. The CEEPI tracks price movements in a global basket of solar PV modules, wind turbines, lithium ion batteries for EVs and battery storage, weighted by shares of investment. Solar PV module prices saw a strong decline as Chinese exports of cells and modules reached 255 GW in 2023, over three times the 2019 level. Price pressures in the wind turbine industry have somewhat eased although prices remain high for non Chinese producers. After an increase in prices in 2022, battery pack prices also dropped by 14% in 2023. The main driver was a major reduction in prices of critical minerals, as well as an increase in production capacity. While the low price environment may foster additional deployment of clean energy technologies in the medium term, it currently presents challenges for producers’ financial performance. Industry revenues declined by 10% in 2023 while operating profits plummeted by 34%. Free cash flow also decreased by over 40%, constraining the industry's ability to allocate significant capital for future growth. These challenges have been exacerbated by increases in production costs in recent years. Since 2020, production cash costs for copper, nickel, and cobalt have all trended upwards, with marginal declines in 2023. Between 2020 and 2023, production costs increased by 6% per year for copper, 11% for nickel and 13% for cobalt. Royalties were the largest contributor for copper and nickel, and costs related to energy and reagents were the main driver across the materials. This triggered a flurry of announcements to put capacity into maintenance and suspend operations . While many high cost producers and new entrants are feeling the impact of the price crash, numerous established assets are still profitable in the current price environment. This suggests that, while prices may rebound as the destocking cycle ends, significant increases could be restrained by growing supplies in the near term. Consequently, this could lead to further geographical concentration of production, as today's dominant suppliers typically operate at the lower end of the cost curve. Against this backdrop, we have assessed the combined investment levels of 25 major mining companies with substantial involvement in developing minerals essential for the energy transition. These companies encompass diversified mining majors and specialised developers focused on specific energy transition minerals such as copper, nickel, cobalt, and lithium. Our assessment suggests that investment in critical minerals mining grew by 10% in 2023 , a smaller increase compared with the 30% growth in 2022. While investment spending by diversified majors increased by 15%, investment by lithium specialists saw a sharp rise by 60%, despite headwinds from weak prices. Exploration spending grew by 15% in 2023, with Canada and Australia registering the largest increases, followed closely by Africa. Spending for lithium exhibited an impressive 80% increase despite challenging market conditions, followed by platinum and nickel. In 2023, companies allocated approximately 50% of the generated cash to investment, while the remainder flowed back to shareholders and lenders through dividends, share buybacks and debt repayment. Diversified mining majors appear to take a more measured approach to investment, whereas specialist players focusing on specific minerals allocated a greater portion to growth investment, although noticeable reductions in new debt issuances were observed. As venture capital  investors look for new opportunities across EV supply chains, battery recycling and critical mineral extraction and refining continued to gain momentum. VC investment in the battery recycling space expanded significantly in 2023, notably driven by a USD 540 million round of growth equity funding to United States based Ascend Elements. Investment in mining and refining start ups contracted by 12% to USD 375 million in 2023. Cobalt extraction attracted nearly USD 200 million in 2023. Lithium extraction and refining attracted USD 150 million, much higher than the dip of 2022 but still below the record year of 2021. Notable critical mineral deals in 2023 included USD 50 million series A investment by Canada based Summit Nanotech to scale its more sustainable lithium extraction technology. In the United States, Kobold Metals raised USD 195 million in growth equity to expand cobalt extraction, Energy Exploration Technologies raised USD 50 million for direct lithium extraction from GM Ventures, and Atlas Materials raised USD 27 million in seed money to develop nickel extraction technologies. China is the dominant global refiner for critical minerals, processing over half of all lithium, cobalt, graphite and rare earth elements. However, with the exception of graphite and rare earth elements, China is not a major mining centre for these minerals. Therefore, China relies on imports of concentrates and feedstock to supply its refining and subsequent manufacturing operations. The security of supply of these minerals is of a critical concern to China as well. The importance of these minerals has driven an acceleration of Chinese investment into the mining sector, both domestically and internationally. In 2023 Chinese investment in the metals and mining sector related to the Belt and Road Initiative reached USD 19,4 billion, the highest level in a decade, and a remarkable 160% increase from 2022. China’s investment in and acquisition of overseas mines has grown significantly in the past ten years, reaching record levels of USD 10 billion in the first half of 2023 with a particular focus on battery metals such as lithium, nickel and cobalt. Out of the seven lithium assets in Africa that are expected to start production by 2027, five have at least 50% equity ownership by Chinese companies. One of the most significant investments was the Arcadia project in Zimbabwe . In Latin America, a consortium led by CATL won a bid in 2023 for a USD 1,4 billion investment to develop Bolivia's resources of lithium. In addition, the Chinese mining major Zijin Mining acquired Canada’s Neo Lithium for USD 770 million in 2021 to access the Tres Quebradas lithium project in Argentina. China accounted for 44% of global lithium M&A investments  over the past three years and most of these deals were related to projects in the initial stage of development . Chinese companies also dominate nickel mining in Indonesia, the largest global supplier of nickel, with a surge of investment over recent years since the complete ore export ban in 2020, including in supporting infrastructure from the Belt and Road initiative. In 2024, majority Chinese owned producers supply over 80% of Indonesia’s battery nickel output. Domestically, China has also ramped up its mining activity, being the third largest lithium producer. The Xiangyuan lepidolite project  is expected to bring 60 kt to 70 kt of lithium carbonates equivalent per year to the domestic market. Another critical measure from China is the accumulation of national stockpiles, particularly during times of low commodity prices. China’s State Reserves Bureau took advantage of the global financial crisis and metal price slump to build up inventories and stockpiles of critical materials, acting as a buffer for the industry against short term disruption which can also be used as market balancing volumes to influence prices. In the current lower price and oversupply environment, there is anticipation that China may continue to increase supply, taking market share from other players. Inventories and trading volumes of critical minerals at major metals future exchanges provide an indicator on the liquidity. Copper and nickel have been traded for long and more actively in London Metal Exchange , Shanghai Futures Exchange , or Chicago Mercantile Exchange  due to their longstanding consumption in industries. With the rising demand for clean energy technologies, cobalt and lithium have been making notable appearances in major metal exchanges in recent years. With LME and CME stocks combined, copper stocks have been dwindling to historic lows although there has been a recent surge in SHFE stocks. In recent months, copper stock in the SHFE saw the strongest increase since 2020, reflecting China’s high imports to fill up the low inventory from last year and meet demand growth in manufacturing. This high level may subside in the near term, however, as consumption picks up with China’s stronger than expected manufacturing activity and higher business confidence. While visible stocks at exchanges represent only a fraction of total stocks, their decline suggests a tightening market and limited capacity to absorb supply shocks. Inventories for nickel, despite the SHFE recording a four year high in recent months, still dwindles from its historical high level in aggregate terms. The LME saw a rise earlier in 2024 due to the addition of Russian and Chinese nickel. However, a ban on Russian origin metal introduced in April 2024 may impact this growth going forward. Trading volumes of copper and nickel on major metals exchanges indicate them as the most liquid among key energy transition minerals due to their longer history of consumption in industries. Liquidity of nickel has yet to recover from the level prior to the LME’s contract suspension in March 2022, which created a ripple effect on the SHFE to also suspend nickel contract for a day. Cobalt and lithium have seen notable growth in trading volumes in the LME and CME over the last two years as their demand trends upwards. As expected cobalt demand rises, trading activity increased on the CME cobalt contract with producers and consumers responding to the narrative. Lithium contracts soared last year with growing hedging activity from traders and industry after its price dropped in 2023. Growing demand for lithium has led market players to hedge from increasing exposure to the volatile commodities market. However, the trading liquidity of battery metals still lags significantly behind that of other bulk materials, despite recent improvements. As it stands, daily traded volume as a percentage of annual production represents less than 1% for lithium and cobalt. Laws, regulations, and high level policies are being reformed and issued globally, given the latest surge in interest for critical minerals projects. From policies included in the 2023 update of the Critical Minerals Policy Tracker, it is clear that producing countries and consumer countries often have different policy objectives. ESG regulations and co operation agreements are more apparent in developed producer economies and in consumer countries, with some endowed with resources also focusing on financing project development. On the other hand, jurisdictions on the supply side have focused on ensuring economic benefits from their own resources. To boost supply resilience, countries are increasingly working together, both multilaterally and bilaterally, to identify priority projects and strengthen co operative ties. While some producing countries already have high level critical minerals strategies, such as Australia and Canada, more critical minerals strategies are now under development, particularly by new market entrants. For example, the African Minerals Development Centre  is developing an African Green Minerals Strategy which will aim to guide African countries as they consider how to exploit their raw materials. Individual countries are also in the process of developing strategies, such as Zambia, which is intending to release a critical minerals strategy in 2024. Some mineral producing jurisdictions have created public strategic minerals investment funds. In February 2024, Brazil announced a USD 200 million fund to support both exploration and improvements in ESG practices. In October 2023, Australia expanded its Critical Minerals Facility with a USD 1,3 billion investment, financing extraction and processing projects. Canada’s CAD 1,5 billion  Strategic Innovation Fund, as part of the CAD 2,8 billion Critical Minerals Strategy, aims to prioritise innovative critical minerals manufacturing, processing and recycling projects. In Latin America, both Mexico and Chile enacted policies to develop their domestic lithium mining industries. Mexico followed its 2022 Mining Reform with legislative amendments in 2023 that streamlined the mining permitting process and strengthened environmental and social protections. Pertinent amendments include:  cancelling concessions for environmental and safety risks  creating new mining offenses  empowering the water authority to reduce the industrial water concession for mining operations to ensure enough water for local consumption  prohibiting mining operations in protected areas and  placing the liability for mining and metallurgical waste on concession holders. Chile also followed its 2023 National Lithium Strategy with an update to its Mining Royalty Law in 2023. The law established a mining royalty for the exploitation of copper and lithium to distribute economic benefits across the country, along with a legal body to administer it. Included in the law are increases to the tax burden on mining activities specifically for mining operators whose annual sales are predominantly derived from copper and exceed an equivalent value of 50 000 metric tonnes of fine copper, but with a maximum potential tax burden of 45,5% for those with 80 000 metric tonnes and 46,5% for the rest. Revenue from the law  will be distributed to funds such as:  a fund to compensate mining communities that have been directly affected by the negative externalities of mining activities   a fund for the most vulnerable communities in the country and  a fund to leverage productive infrastructure investments in the northern regions. The United States and European Union have proposed reforms to permitting processes to increase domestic mining production and reduce dependency on imports. The Permitting Action Plan outlines key actions, including better internal coordination, tracking of review progress, enhancing outreach and providing technical assistance to affected stakeholders. The Inflation Reduction Act provides funding to various government agencies to hire new personnel and develop tools and guidance to strengthen and accelerate environmental reviews. Separately, the proposed Critical Raw Materials Act  would allow certain projects to be designated as “strategic” that would have a streamlined permitting process. The act lays out criteria for a project to be designated as “strategic,” including whether the project would be implemented sustainably and responsibly. Besides permitting processes, the CRMA would also create a monitoring mechanism to mitigate the risk of supply chain bottlenecks. In order to meet the policy goal of increasing the amount of local value addition, some producing countries are turning to export restrictions on raw or unprocessed ores. In 2020, Indonesia announced that it would restrict the export of unprocessed nickel. While the World Trade Organization  ruled against Indonesia’s restrictions following the European Union’s challenge, the lack of a quorum at the WTO Appellate Body has delayed the appeal process indefinitely. In the meantime, Indonesia implemented similar restrictions on bauxite ore in June 2023 and announced restrictions on copper ore expected to be in force in June 2024. Other countries have adopted or are considering adopting similar measures, including Namibia, which banned the export of lithium ore in mid 2023, and Zimbabwe, which banned raw lithium exports in 2023 to attempt to secure value addition. Other countries in Asia have enacted export restrictions designed to encourage supply and safeguard national interest. China issued export controls last year, such as the export control of gallium and germanium related items  and the export control for graphite related items , through which businesses are required to seek export licences from the government. At the same time, consumer countries have developed laws and regulations targeting sufficient supplies of responsible critical minerals. This has been particularly true in countries with large downstream manufacturing industries, which rely on a supply of these minerals. Japan announced a policy on initiatives for ensuring stable supply of critical minerals in 2023, which aims to secure supplies for its battery manufacturing goals and provides subsidies for exploration, feasibility studies, mine development, smelting and research and development to develop supplies. Korea announced a list of 33 critical minerals and 10 strategic critical minerals, of which the latter will be prioritised to stabilise the supply chain of high tech industries such as semi conductors and secondary batteries. The country is also seeking to deepen co operation with 30 identified resource rich countries to secure mineral deals. As a next step to minerals lists, strategic plans have been issued over the last year which focus on specific needs based on countries’ priority minerals. Japan released a Resource Diplomacy Guidance, which outlines the country’s approach to minerals and producing countries and specifies the priority minerals and countries from which it intends to source. Some countries also make financing support available for overseas projects through direct equity investments or sovereign wealth funds, such as in Japan, Saudi Arabia and China. The United Kingdom also pledged USD 1 million to identify bankable projects in processing and midstream value addition in 14 African countries. In the European Union, France set up a critical minerals and metals equity fund managed by InfraVia and backed by up to USD 500 million in government funds. The fund will function as a minority shareholder of industrial and mining stakeholders across the value chain, and is focused on securing offtake contracts to support French and European industries, with a commitment to adhere to high social and environmental standards in collaboration with various financing partners. In the last year, consumer countries have also made significant strides to integrate policies targeting the sourcing of responsibly produced minerals. In the European Union, the Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive  and the Corporate Sustainability Due Diligence Directive  enhance corporate accountability regarding ESG performance. The CSRD will make it mandatory for all large European companies and companies listed on EU regulated markets to report on selected ESG metrics by 1 January 2024. The CSRD is working to release sector specific requirements, including for the mining sector. Complementary to the CSRD, the CSDDD imposes mandatory human rights and environmental due diligence requirements on large companies, compelling them to identify, prevent, and mitigate adverse impacts in heir operations and entire value chain. This includes obligations for companies to establish and update a climate transition plan aimed at aligning business strategies with the Paris Agreement and the European Union’s 2050 climate neutrality target. A number of countries work through the Minerals Security Partnership  to collaboratively strengthen security of supply. In 2024, the MSP welcomed Estonia as its newest member, bringing participation to 14 countries plus the European Union. This effort is focused on supporting the development of strategic projects. In late 2023 and early 2024, the MSP countries announced progress in raising financing or securing offtake agreements for a number of projects including ones targeting manganese, nickel, and graphite. There has been a growing trend of countries announcing bilateral or multilateral strategic partnerships focused on critical minerals, some of which integrate strong ESG standards. Recent examples include a Statement of Intent between Australia and the United Kingdom and the United Kingdom and South Africa partnership on minerals for future clean energy technologies, Strategic Partnerships between the European Union and Chile, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zambia, and a memoranda of understanding between Canada and Korea. The specific content of these partnerships varies, but they generally are aimed at strengthening bilateral ties and providing vehicles for countries to support individual projects. That said, the specific impact of individual partnerships depend on how they are implemented, which is difficult to gauge in many cases as many partnership arrangements are not made public. In the next year, we expect to see more bilateral agreements and strategic partnerships emerge with a focus on either securing or developing critical minerals supplies. The European Union is looking to expand its network of Sustainable Investment Facilitation Agreements of Free Trade Agreements. Emerging producer countries are also expected to continue signing agreements to boost investment into critical minerals projects in their countries. In 2023, economic ministers from France, Germany, and Italy aligned to enhance the sustainable supply chain of critical raw materials by setting specific targets for extraction, processing, and recycling, and by expanding the list of strategic materials to include aluminium. They committed to enforcing stringent ESG criteria and established a dedicated working group to ensure effective implementation of these initiatives. Strategic plans have incorporated measures aimed at boosting rates of battery recycling, and 2023 saw a notable uptick in policies aimed at increasing the recycling of clean energy technologies to secure critical minerals from both consumer and producer countries. The European Union’s Critical Raw Materials Act will require member states to identify, adopt and implement measures to improve the collection and recycling of critical mineral rich waste, as well as investigate the potential for recovery of critical raw materials from extractive waste in active and historic mining sites. Norway’s Mineral Strategy, released in June 2023, also includes focus on a circular economy, requiring new mineral projects to present a circular business plan. Specific measures to increase recycling have come in the form of investment into research and development and waste collection, such as the United States’ USD 192 million of funding for increasing recycling rates and research and development into battery recycling technologies from consumer products. There has also been project specific funding, with the European Commission providing battery producer BASF with a USD 110 million grant to support a battery recycling project in Spain. Critical mineral supply chains cannot be truly secure, reliable and resilient unless they are also sustainable and responsible. The mining industry does not have the best track record managing ESG impacts, but many players are aiming to change that. Our assessment of company progress across various ESG dimensions , based on the public sustainability reports and commitments published by 25 major companies that have a strong presence in critical minerals supply chains , shows progress in reporting and growing commitments. All of these companies report efforts to improve their ESG performance, but goals vary starkly. About 20 have pledged to achieve net zero emissions by or before 2050, with the remaining yet to establish a firm long term emissions target. Most net zero targets apply only to emissions from direct operations  or purchased energy and heat , leaving out other emissions from the industry’s value chains . Around five companies have established targets to reduce absolute emissions by 35% or more by 2030 or earlier. Many companies refer to a reduction in emissions intensities to 2030 or have established reduction targets only for 2035. Several industry players have also committed to other ESG goals, such as causing no net loss of biodiversity or limiting the amount of freshwater used in mining. These commitments are being followed by better reporting of ESG practices. Our assessment revealed an increase in the availability of data for the latest years, indicating the industry is putting more effort into tracking its performance. The number of companies reporting investment in communities, female share of workers and water discharge increased by 40% or more during this period. All players now report GHG emissions and nearly 90% report share of female workers, injury rates and community investment. Nevertheless, an industry wide assessment of progress on ESG still faces many challenges. Only around ten companies published data on land area disturbed and rehabilitated, and less than five reported on involuntary resettlement. Few operators detail risks related to their supply chains, such as potential child labour, or provide clear information on contract disclosure. ESG reporting varies substantially in both consistency and breadth. Most companies aggregate their reported data in some form or another, often at the company level, making it difficult to compare performance for specific minerals or regions. Less than five companies disclosed site level data consistently in their reports positive examples include Aracdium Lithium, Codelco, and First Quantum. Units and scope of reporting also vary, sometimes even within the same report . The sustainable and responsible supply of critical minerals depends on a myriad of interrelated practices, from water stewardship to emissions management, engaging with communities and ensuring safe labour standards, a fair share of benefits, protecting biodiversity, reducing waste, and much more. The industry is making progress on several of these fronts. From 2019 to 2022, reported injury rates decreased by nearly 30%, investments in communities surged from USD 0,3 billion to USD 1 billion, and the average share of female workers went from just over 15% to 20%. Data are more sparse for other indicators, but available information suggests improvements in the amount of waste being recovered through reprocessing and reuse and the share of water that is being recycled or re used in industry facilities. These positive trends do not hold for all companies, but reflect widespread industry efforts. On the other hand, there are many areas where progress has been limited and some even show negative trends. The amount of waste generated per unit of mineral produced increased by over 20% from 2019 to 2022, potentially due to the development of lower grade resources. Reported water consumption increased by around 25% during this period even in the face of high supply risks related to droughts for copper and other minerals. Similarly, indicators related to land rehabilitation, effluent discharge and GHG emissions did not exhibit visible improvements despite growing ESG commitments. Voluntary sustainability standards can help actors improve performance and earn ESG credentials. These include the ICMM‘s Mining Principles and performance expectations, the Initiative for Responsible Mining Assurance‘s Standard for Responsible Mining, Canada’s Towards Sustainable Mining, the Responsible Minerals Initiative and the Copper Mark’s Risk Readiness Assessment Criteria Guide. While these standards can all lead to increased transparency and sustainability performance, there are major differences between the overall stringency of requirements, the scope of their application, the approach to compliance and reporting, uptake, and in oversight and assurance systems. Greater transparency, due diligence, harmonised approaches to credibility and appropriate incentives are needed to untap their full potential. Material traceability services are also on the rise. This involves working with suppliers to track sources and related impacts up to the point of incorporation into an end product. It can allow an assessment of risks and ESG performance along the supply chain, contributing to increased mineral security. Policymakers and companies, however, should be aware of the limitations of end to end product traceability. Due to the nature of both aggregation and blending in mineral supply chains, particularly at the smelting and refinery stage, traceability is not always possible or practical. Traceability mechanisms can be paired with a risk mitigation approach for better ESG due diligence. The world is on a journey towards achieving net zero emissions, and has declared its ambition to limit global warming to 1,5 °C, which would mean completing this journey already by 2050. Whichever pathway this journey eventually takes, it will require a massive expansion of clean energy technology deployment, along with reliable supplies of critical minerals. While short term market dynamics are crucial, medium to long term perspectives on critical minerals demand and supply are equally important to ensure that clean energy transitions are not hindered by supply chain bottlenecks. There are numerous questions that need to be addressed. How fast might demand for critical minerals grow under different assumptions about the strength of climate action? Can we ensure sufficient volumes of critical minerals to support the acceleration of energy transitions? What are the key risk areas that policymakers need to monitor, and how do prospects vary by mineral? Where are today's project developments leading us in 2030 and beyond, in terms of diversified supplies? What role do environmental, social, and governance  considerations play in shaping future market developments? This chapter addresses these crucial questions by providing a comprehensive outlook for demand and supply for key energy transition minerals, namely copper, lithium, nickel, cobalt, graphite and rare earth elements. Additionally, we also briefly discuss key issues around aluminium, manganese, silicon, phosphate and platinum group metals . Demand projections encompass both clean energy applications and other uses, focusing on the three IEA scenarios , the Stated Policies Scenario , the Announced Pledges Scenario  and the Net Zero Emissions by 2050  Scenario , with a particular focus on the latter two climate driven scenarios in which national and/or global climate goals are achieved . More details on the methodology can be found in the Annex. Supply projections are based on a detailed review of all announced projects. We have constructed two supply scenarios , a base case and a high production case. The base case includes production from existing assets and those under construction, along with projects that have a high chance of moving ahead as they have obtained all necessary permits, secured financing, and/or established offtake contracts. The high production case additionally considers projects at a reasonably advanced stage of development, seeking financing and/or permits. In many instances, these projects are in the process of conducting feasibility studies, and in some cases these assessments are already complete. Neither case considers projects that are in very early stages of development, or includes theoretical projects for which resources might be adequate but which have not been proposed. For these reasons, our focus on the supply side is on the period to 2040. Based on these two supply scenarios, we assess how today's geographical concentration evolves over time, for both mining and refining, and how expected supply compares with primary supply requirements in climate driven scenarios . In some cases, we highlight potential gaps between expected supplies and material requirements in climate driven scenarios. We do not attempt to close these gaps by introducing additional projects beyond those already underway or being considered. Climate driven scenarios, the NZE Scenario in particular, reflect many demand side measures such as higher recycling rates, some behavioural changes , but we recognise that there is a possibility of additional demand side measures or technological innovation which could contribute to reducing demand further. The aim of the exercise is to provide a framework for assessing progress towards achieving global energy security and climate goals and risks that may arise along the way. There remain considerable uncertainties over how market balances evolve in practice. On the demand side, it should be noted that the world is not yet on track for the outcomes in the APS or the NZE Scenario doing so will require significant additional efforts by policymakers and industries alike. Where gaps are identified between future demand and supply, these may potentially be closed by developing additional projects, scaling up recycling further, and promoting a range of material efficiency measures beyond what are already assumed. The results should not be interpreted to mean that energy transition goals are unattainable due to material constraints. This chapter starts a brief review of projected mineral demand in the clean energy sector and presents overall findings of the detailed outlook for key energy transition minerals. Each mineral section then presents demand and supply projection results and discusses key issues underpinning long term market developments. The analysis in this chapter is complemented by the assessment in Chapter 3, which provides structured “clean energy transitions risk assessments” across four major dimensions , supply risks, geopolitical risks, barriers to respond to supply disruptions, and exposure to ESG and climate risks. These assessments aim to help policymakers identify potential areas of weakness for each material in supporting their energy transition goals. The growth of power generation capacity from low emissions sources accelerates in all three scenarios. Renewables account for the majority of capacity additions in every region over the outlook period. By far, wind and solar PV are the largest contributors to this development, and total installed solar PV capacity in particular far outstrips that of any other source in all scenarios. By 2026, solar PV becomes the largest contributor to installed electrical capacity in the STEPS, followed by wind. This growth trajectory would see global renewable capacity increase to 2,5 times its current level by 2030, a major expansion but one that falls short of the tripling goal agreed at COP28. Government actions to facilitate grid connections, and resolve permitting, policy and financing issues, are needed to accelerate growth. In the APS, low emissions power sources account for almost 80% of total power capacity additions in 2030, with solar PV making up 55% and wind 20%. Annual solar PV and wind capacity additions grow by two times to 2050 in the APS and by over two and a half times in the NZE Scenario. The acceleration of renewable energy deployment calls for modernising distribution grids and establishing new transmission corridors to connect renewable resources that are far from demand centres such as cities and industrial areas. Around 3 000 GW of renewable power projects are waiting in grid connection queues , equivalent to five times the amount of solar PV and wind capacity added in 2022. Due to aged infrastructure and a high share of variable renewables in the system across the globe, reaching national goals also means adding or refurbishing a total of over 80 million km of grids by 2040, the equivalent of the entire existing global grid. This would underpin significant growth of copper and aluminium demand for cables. Grid investment growth in the past decade has occurred mainly in the People’s Republic of China  and advanced economies. China alone accounted for over one third of the world’s transmission grid expansion in the past decade, connecting, among other places, the eastern load centres to the renewable energy rich provinces. With ongoing policy support, improving economics, and an expanding number of models available, global EV sales  are set to grow strongly, more than tripling by 2030 in the STEPS and APS to almost 45 million and 50 million vehicles, respectively, and increasing more than fivefold to 70 million in the NZE Scenario. This is primarily driven by the sales of electric cars, where a global sales share of 18% in 2023 increases to 45% in the STEPS and almost 50% in the APS by 2030, while reaching two thirds of all sales in the NZE Scenario. This rapid sales growth continues to accelerate to 2050 with sales growing more than fivefold in the STEPS and over sevenfold in the APS. Sales grow almost eightfold in the NZE Scenario by 2050 reaching 110 million vehicles. The share of electric cars in total car sales continues to surge, reaching 60% in the STEPS, over three quarters in the APS and over 95% in the NZE Scenario by 2050. This exceptional growth in EV sales drives a dramatic growth in battery demand. From almost 1 TWh in 2023, demand more than quadruples by 2030 in the STEPS to 3,8 TWh and reaches 4,4 TWh in the APS, while increasing sevenfold to 6 TWh by 2030 in the NZE Scenario. The growth rates in battery demand outpace growth in EV sales due to additional demand growth of battery storage, which surpasses the rates of demand growth for light duty vehicles in both the STEPS and APS by 2030 and by 2050. There is also significant growth in battery demand for electric trucks, which increases eighteen fold in the STEPS and twenty three fold in the APS by 2030. In the NZE Scenario, EV battery demand grows sevenfold. By 2050 global battery demand reaches 9 TWh in the STEPS and 12 TWh in the APS, growing tenfold and fourteen fold from 2023 demand, respectively. In the APS, demand from electric trucks becomes larger than global storage demand in 2050. In the NZE Scenario demand reaches 13 TWh, a fifteen fold increase. In 2023 battery production capacity  is two and half times battery demand. Looking forward, our analysis of committed production capacity includes gigafactories that are starting or under construction or have reached final investment decision. In 2025 committed production is double both STEPS and APS demand, while being 40% higher than demand in the NZE Scenario. By 2030, rapid demand growth narrows this gap, such that committed production is only 30% higher than APS demand and close to the requirements in the NZE Scenario. However, if preliminary announcements are included, meaning gigafactories that have been announced but not yet reached final investment decision, anticipated manufacturing capacity takes another leap ahead. When preliminary announcements are included, production capacity exceeds APS demand by 80% and is 40% greater than demand in the NZE Scenario. Of all new committed capacity additions from 2023, 55% are in China by 2030. These projections imply intense price competition among producers, with significant implications for global battery supply chains. In terms of electric car cathode chemistries, lithium iron phosphate  and lithium manganese iron phosphate  are set to become the leading chemistries by share from 2035. The LFP variant LMFP looks likely to be increasingly utilised, taking share from LFP and also from the high nickel chemistries due to its higher energy density than conventional LFP. Low nickel high cobalt chemistries such as the nickel manganese cobalt  333 are assumed to be phased out by 2030, with the trend of reducing cobalt content in favour of higher nickel contents continuing. Manganese rich chemistries including lithium manganese rich NMC  and lithium nickel manganese oxide  start to take increasing shares of the high nickel and LFP market. LNMO are anticipated to take a small share of the mid range market, being higher energy density than LFP but not near the levels of the high nickel chemistries. LMR NMC enables significantly higher energy densities due to its ability to store higher concentrations of lithium, and therefore is expected to take increasing shares of the long range high energy density market at the expense of high nickel chemistries. High nickel chemistries continue to play a major role in the long range market with higher nickel contents being utilised including the 96% Ni NMC. However, their share of the EV market is expected to decrease from 55% in 2023 to around 40% in 2040, as manganese rich chemistries and LFP/LMFP continue to displace them. This is a remarkable change from 2020 when high nickel chemistries dominated the EV battery market. Finally, sodium ion batteries are anticipated to play an increasingly significant role after 2030, reaching a global market share of almost 10% in 2040, displacing some LFP in the low range EV market, particularly if lithium prices rise and if there are phosphorous supply issues for LFP. Our analysis suggest that LFP remains the preferred solution for the battery storage market, with a growing longer term role for sodium ion. Looking at anodes, current trends indicate a growing share of silicon doped graphite anodes and a shift towards higher silicon contents. This trend continues to displace conventional graphite anodes, eventually reaching high silicon contents above 50% and ultimately silicon anodes for long range premium markets. Lithium metal anodes are anticipated to eventually play a greater role after 2035 with ASSBs, hybrid liquid solid state batteries and advanced liquid electrolytes, starting with the most premium long range vehicles. However, the speed of deployment is highly uncertain and dependent on considerable technical and scaling challenges to be solved. Finally, with the increasing adoption of sodium ion batteries, hard carbon, anode material for sodium ion batteries takes a greater share of the electric car anode market. The accelerating pace of energy transitions is set to significantly boost mineral demand across all the three scenarios. In the STEPS, demand doubles to 2030 with continued growth thereafter. In the APS, demand more than doubles by 2030 and triples by 2050. In the NZE Scenario, the swifter adoption of clean energy technologies implies an even more pronounced surge in demand for critical minerals, nearly tripling by 2030 and growing to over 3,5 times the current levels by 2050, reaching nearly 40 Mt. Our latest mineral demand projections have been updated from those in the Critical Minerals Market Review 2023, reflecting several new technological and policy developments: • Projected demand in the STEPS has been revised upwards due to faster clean energy deployments, notably in solar PV installations and EV sales, driven by strengthened policy measures and improved economics for these technologies. • Although they face some short term headwinds, EV sales have also been revised slightly upwards in the long term, driven by improving economics and policy efforts in major markets. • LFP shares have increased considerably over the last years, and its rapidly growing global share has been reflected in the updated chemistry projections. Manganese based chemistries also take a larger share in the future in the revised assumptions. Alongside assessments of other emerging technologies such as sodium ion batteries, solid state batteries and silicon based anodes, near and long term battery chemistry assumptions have been adjusted, affecting demand projections for nickel, cobalt, manganese, and other materials. The projected deployment of battery storage has been revised upward to account for the rapid pace of deployment in recent years and the increasing need for power system flexibility, resulting in increased demand for battery metals, lithium in particular. Material intensity assumptions have been updated based on the latest literature review and industry consultations. Graphite material requirements have been revised upwards in all scenarios, reflecting a more detailed representation of the amount of silicon required in anodes. Each factor influences projected mineral requirements differently, resulting in slightly higher aggregated mineral demand across all three scenarios by 2050 compared with the previous outlook, with the STEPS seeing the largest overall upwards revision. Demand for each mineral is affected in different ways from these revisions and updates. Nickel sees the largest downwards revisions in both the APS and the NZE Scenario, largely due to the increased prominence of LFP, whereas graphite sees large upwards revisions in all scenarios. However, despite these adjustments in projected mineral demand, demand in climate driven scenarios remains multiple times higher than current levels, underscoring the pivotal role of clean energy technologies in propelling total mineral demand growth. From copper to lithium and to cobalt, clean energy technologies emerge as the predominant consuming segment, significantly elevating their share in total demand compared with present levels. It is important to note that demand projections are subject to large variations, influenced not only by broader policy considerations  but also by technology costs and innovations, as well as behavioural factors. To address this complexity, the IEA has developed more than ten alternative cases to assess the impacts of different consumer preferences and technology advancements on future mineral requirements. The findings of these cases are available through the updated IEA Critical Minerals Data Explorer, an accompanying online data tool designed to allows users to easily access and navigate the projection results . Demand for key energy transition minerals is set to expand significantly across all scenarios, mainly driven by the burgeoning requirements in the clean energy sector. In the STEPS, demand for lithium grows fivefold between today and 2040, while demand for graphite almost doubles over the same period. Demand for nickel, cobalt and rare earth elements also shows robust growth, increasing by 65 80% by 2040. If the world gets on track to limit global warming to 1,5 °C, as modelled in the NZE Scenario, demand for copper rises by 50% by 2040. In this scenario, demand for nickel, cobalt and rare earth elements doubles over the next two decades, and graphite demand increases by almost four times to 2040, propelled by the substantial increase in battery deployment for EVs and grid storage. Of all the minerals, lithium stands out in this scenario with nearly ninefold growth by 2040, highlighting its crucial role in batteries. Across all materials, the share of clean energy technologies in total demand rises significantly. In most cases, the clean energy sector emerges as the largest consumer of these minerals. In the NZE Scenario, EVs and battery storage are projected to account for over 90% of total lithium demand by 2030. Moreover, batteries are poised to surpass stainless steel as the leading consumer sector for nickel. As demand expands, the market value of these minerals experiences substantial growth. From around USD 325 billion today, the combined market value of key energy transition minerals is set to increase by 55% in the APS by 2030 and by 80% in the NZE Scenario. By 2040, the market value more than doubles in climate driven scenarios, reaching USD 770 billion in the NZE Scenario. In this scenario, copper maintains the largest market value at USD 330 billion, while the lithium market undergoes significant expansion to USD 230 billion by 2040, emerging as the second largest market, followed by nickel. The graphite market also registers almost sixfold growth over the same period. Today’s aggregate market value of key energy transition minerals aligns broadly with that of iron ore. In the NZE Scenario, copper on its own attains that scale by 2040. In the base case supply scenario, this growth in market value is spread across key regions. For mining, Latin America captures the largest amount with around USD 120 billion by 2030, driven by substantial copper production in the area. Indonesia sees the fastest growth, doubling its market value by 2030 due to its burgeoning nickel mining activities. Africa also witnesses a 65% increase in market value, attributed to the rapid expansion of copper production in the region. However, the market value for refining is notably more concentrated, with China claiming nearly 50% of the market value in 2030. China also sees a rise in market value for mined materials as the country's production of copper, lithium, and rare earth elements undergoes rapid expansion. The rapidly growing demand for minerals, and the variations seen across different scenarios, raises uncertainties about future market balances, and whether future supplies can match the pace of demand growth in scenarios that meet national and global climate goals. In recent years, substantial investments have been made in mineral supply, and an increasing number of projects have been announced, indicating an expansion in expected supply volumes in the coming years. In some cases, such as cobalt, nickel and rare earth elements, the expected supply by 2035 from both existing and announced projects look tight, but aligns more closely with the projected demand in the APS, particularly when projects assumed in the high production case come to fruition. However, the timely delivery of planned projects is far from guaranteed and meeting the requirements in the NZE Scenario necessitates further project developments. A similar trend is observed for graphite, but it should be noted that there is a massive number of announced synthetic anode material projects, primarily located in China. Should natural graphite supply face price spikes or supply constraints, these facilities could offer additional volumes to the supply pool . The situation differs for copper and lithium. Announced projects indicate that a mined copper supply gap may develop in the current decade in the base case. Even under the high production scenario, the anticipated supply by 2035 falls well short of meeting the APS requirements, indicating a potential necessity for a further increase in scrap utilisation, demand reduction through material substitution or technological innovation, alongside efforts to foster additional project developments. Lithium presents another significant challenge, exhibiting a sizeable anticipated gap with climate driven needs, owing to the strong position of lithium ion batteries in EVs and storage applications. The current downturn in prices may dampen investment appetite for new greenfield projects, which could have profound longer term implications. Global mineral supply chains are not well diversified, as highlighted in Chapter 1, and recent progress on diversifying supply sources has been limited. Will this picture change with the multitude of newly announced projects in recent years? Our analysis of project pipelines suggests that the geographical concentration of mining operations is set to remain high in most cases. The situation improves somewhat in the high production case, indicating that many projects being developed in geographically diverse regions are not among the front runners for development. This pattern mirrors the situation in refining operations, as most refining projects are located in today's dominant producers, thus prolonging high concentration levels in refined material production. Between now and 2030, some 70 75% of projected supply growth for refined lithium, nickel, cobalt and rare earth elements, and almost 95% for battery grade spherical and synthetic graphite, comes from today’s top three producers. These high levels of supply concentration raise risks of potential supply disruptions due to physical accidents, geopolitical events or other developments in a key producing country, with major potential implications for the speed of energy transitions. Global demand and supply balances often mask significant regional disparities. From the Inflation Reduction Act  in the United States  to the European Union’s  Critical Raw Materials Act , a wave of policies is emerging aimed at diversifying sources of supply. The IRA seeks to restrict the utilisation of materials obtained from Foreign Entities of Concern, while the EU CRMA targets that no single country should supply more than 65% of Europe's annual consumption of any key materials . Other major consuming countries are increasingly aligned with the objective to diversify their supply sources. However, given that the top producing nation is responsible for a large portion of global supply for most minerals, available supply outside the largest producing country may be significantly constrained to achieve these ambitions. We conducted the “N 1 test” to assess how the supply and demand landscape might appear if the largest global supplier were removed from the market. Specifically we assessed N 1 supply and N 1 material requirements in 2030 in the APS, excluding both anticipated supply from the largest supplier and projected demand from that country. In most cases, the N 1 supply falls significantly below the N 1 material requirements . If the CRMA’s non single origin minimum threshold  is applied in a global context, the N 1 nickel and cobalt supply is barely able to meet this minimum threshold. The situation is even more pronounced for graphite. Although there is abundant supply of graphite globally, the expected N 1 supply is entirely insufficient to meet the minimum threshold. This indicates that without efforts to develop additional projects in geographically diverse regions, achieving the goals set by policy legislation would be challenging. This analysis underscores the need for concerted efforts to expedite the development of promising projects located in geographically diverse regions. Additionally, it highlights the importance of harnessing the potential for value chain expansion in major resource holders in emerging and developing economies, provided such expansion is economically viable and can yield significant economic and social advantages. Investment across the supply chain is crucial, yet equally vital is unlocking the potential of recycling, innovation, and behavioural change. A strong emphasis on recycling can not only diminish the magnitude of primary mineral requirements but also yield substantial security benefits for regions dependent on imported materials. While the share of secondary supply from recycling in total demand remains modest for most focus minerals, it experiences significant growth in the NZE Scenario, particularly post 2030, as policy mandates strengthen and a substantial volume of end of life EV batteries enters the market . Copper is the only critical mineral present in all of the most important clean energy technologies , EVs, solar PV, wind, and electricity networks , due to its unmatched combination of characteristics: electronic conductivity, longevity, ductility and corrosion resistance. Therefore, the security of supply of copper is paramount for the energy transition. Total copper demand is made up of a combination of refined copper demand  plus direct use of scrap . Historically, refined copper demand has been dominated by construction and electricity networks, responsible for 30% and 15% of global demand in 2023, respectively. Other key sources of demand include industrial machinery and equipment  and the transportation sector , as copper is used in the manufacture of key components in all modes of transport. Global refined copper demand grows from 26 Mt in 2023 to 31 Mt in the STEPS and APS and 33 Mt in 2030 in the NZE Scenario. Demand increases further by 20% through to 2050, reaching around 40 Mt in 2050 in the NZE Scenario. This surge in demand is primarily due to the rapid deployment of renewables and EVs, and a significant expansion of electricity networks. Copper is critical for lithium ion batteries for EVs, being irreplaceable for the anode current collector, as well as being used in wiring in the battery packs and being a key component of EV motors. Electricity networks remain the second largest source of demand after construction for the STEPS and APS, but in the NZE Scenario, it becomes the largest source of demand by 2030 before construction again overtakes to be the dominant source after 2040. However, copper demand from EVs experiences the largest growth in demand, increasing more than twelvefold from 2% of demand in 2023 to 12% in 2050 in the APS and 13% in the NZE Scenario. Overall, construction remains the leading source of refined copper demand in climate driven scenarios although material efficiency measures temper demand in the sector. The share of clean energy technologies in refined copper demand has grown modestly in recent years from 22% in 2015 to a quarter in 2023 however, this decade the share dramatically increases, reaching a third in STEPS, almost doubling to reach almost 40% in the APS and 45% in the NZE Scenario in 2030 due to the rapid deployment of renewables and EVs. The earlier electrification of end uses and penetration of renewables requires a rapid addition of electricity networks over the period to 2040, after which the pace of expansion decelerates. This leads to a decrease in copper demand for electricity networks between 2040 and 2050, resulting in a slight decrease in the share of clean energy technologies. Global mined copper supply reached 22,5 Mt in 2023, up 8% from 2020. Today’s copper supply is relatively diversified compared with the other key energy transition minerals. The share of the top three producers was 47% in 2023, and it has been at a similar level since 2015. Chile is the world’s current largest producer, producing a quarter of global supply. This is down from 30% in 2015 due to declining ore grades, ageing assets and low reinvestment in expansion. Meanwhile, with its remarkable growth of copper output, the DRC has doubled its share of global supply from 6% to 12% over the same period, overtaking Peru as the second largest supplier. The DRC copper belt is home to some of the highest grade copper resources in the world, for instance the Kamoa Kakula mine is one of the world’s highest grade major copper mines, ten times the global average . This makes capital and production costs, and emissions in the DRC significantly lower than other regions, driving a dramatic growth in supply. China is the fourth largest producer with 8% of global supply while Russia supplies 5%. Indonesia has seen impressive growth since 2020 doubling its share to 5% in a few years while the share of Australian supply has been decreasing. The top three copper mines in 2023 produced over 10% of global copper production, being Escondida in Chile, PT Freeport Indonesia  in Indonesia and Collahuasi in Chile. Based on the current project pipeline, mined copper supply reaches around 25 Mt in 2026 then declines thereafter as assets age and grades decline. The top three producer’s share in total mine production increases to 55% by 2040 from 47% today. Chile remains the largest producer going forward, contributing around a quarter of global supply through to 2040 while the DRC remains the second largest producer. China also continues to grow its share of global supply, from 8% in 2023 to 12% in 2040. Russia and Indonesia also continue to grow in supply share, together supplying 13% in 2040. The growing share of supply from these countries displaces a significantly shrinking share from Peru, which drops from 12% today to 7% in 2040 due to a lack of viable projects and ageing assets. Beyond the challenges of declining copper ore quality, there are additional pressures coming from local social and environmental opposition, particularly in Latin America. At the end of last year, Cobre Panama, one of the largest copper mines in the world supplying 1,5% of global copper output, was shut down by the government due to widespread protests regarding environmental damage and corruption concerns. Beyond the loss of one of the largest copper producing assets, the case is expected to deter mining investment in the country. One of Peru’s largest copper mines, Las Bambas, also saw a strike at the end of last year due to workers conditions, having already seen disruptions previously due to indigenous community protests demanding more equitable distribution of mining gains with the local community, as well as other protests. With most of the world’s largest mines located in Latin America, if several of these face major opposition, disrupting logistics or shutdowns similar to Cobre Panama, there could be major consequences for global copper supply. The world’s largest copper mine Escondida Chile produces 5% of global copper supply alone, while four of today’s top five mines are located in the region, emphasising the vulnerability. Efforts to expand mines in other places could reduce this dependency. Copper refining is more concentrated than mining, with a current top three refiner share of 60%, becoming more concentrated since 2015. Refining is much more concentrated in a single country. China is currently the world’s dominant copper refiner, with 45% market share, having rapidly grown from 30% in 2015. Despite Chile being the world’s largest copper miner supplying a quarter of global supply in 2023, it produces only 8% of the world’s refined copper, and this share has decreased since 2015 when it was 12%. This demonstrates that over half of Chile’s mined copper concentrate is exported for refining, with the majority to China. Copper concentrate is the number one exported product from Chile in terms of value. Since 2012 exports of copper concentrates from Chile have increased 60% mainly to China while exports of refined copper have dropped 20% over the same period. This decline is largely due to the decline in production from solvent extraction electrowinning  mines which directly produce refined copper from oxide ore. As the oxide ore supply decreased, with many transitioning from processing oxides to conventional sulphide mining, its export of concentrate increased and refined copper decreased. There are also environmental concerns which have led to the closing of smelters in Chile. The DRC is now the joint second largest copper refiner with Chile. While Chile has lost market share since 2015, the DRC has doubled its share in the same time up from 4%. The top three copper refineries in 2023 produced 9% of global refined copper, being Guixi and Jinchuan in China, and Onsan in Korea. Going forward, the share of the top three refiners remains at the same level at around 60%. China, however, continues to increase its dominance of copper processing, supplying around half of global refined copper from 2030 onwards. Little change occurs for the other countries in this period. This again creates a major dependency and vulnerability. Countries in Latin America could prioritise the development of greater domestic processing capability. Not only would this help diversify refined supplies of copper, it would support the countries’ economies increasing their share of the value chain. However, cost and environmental concerns are key barriers. Smelting is not a high margin business, and increasing pressures from high labour and energy costs have made it challenging to compete with China. Capital requirements to reduce emissions and increase the sustainability of operations add to this pressure. Recently Chile’s Codelco closed its Ventanas smelter due to pollution which resulted in a poisioning incident in the local community. Looking at mining and refining production in 2023 by ownership  shows a different picture from production location. Based on the analysis of top 20 companies, mining appears to be similarly diversified by ownership with a top three country owner share of 45%, the same as production location. European companies are in fact the largest copper producers with over 20% of production. US companies also produce almost 20% of global supply, despite little mining taking place domestically, and this is all from two companies: Freeport McMoRan and Southern Copper. Companies from Australia and Canada are also major copper producers, together supplying 20% of production despite limited domestic supply. In terms of refining, the picture is similar with Chinese companies dominating with 40% of production. Top three refining countries’ share by owner is the same as by location with 60%. European companies are the second largest refiners with 20% as well as being the second largest refining location but with only 10% by geography. Japanese companies are the third largest refiners despite being the fifth largest refining location. Again US companies play a leading role in copper refining being the fourth largest refiners. Declining ore quality is the most critical issue for copper, resulting in increasing capital and operating costs. Operating costs have increased in most areas in real terms since 2020 with energy, on site, treatment and refining charges , shipment costs and reagent cost increases all being major drivers. Capital costs have also increased significantly for new copper projects. Recent brownfield projects have a capital intensity around USD 30 000 per tonne, whereas in real terms past brownfield projects initiated around 2017 were cheaper at around USD 20 000/tonne. Expansions are costing more due to having to go deeper and the need to mine more waste to maintain production levels from the declining ore quality. Greenfield projects also suffer higher costs due to the lack of high quality resources, the need to comply with higher ESG standards, challenging geology, and higher labour and equipment costs. The recently commissioned DRC mine Kamoa Kakula, with one of the highest grade copper ore in the world, contrasts from current trends with a capital intensity around just USD 7 000/tonne, demonstrating the major cost advantages in the high grade areas of the DRC, and explaining its rapid rise in supply. Adding to the supply pressures from the declining ore quality are various disruptions to copper supply . The global disruption rate in copper supply has been consistent around 5% of the original targeted production. At a global scale, the primary causes vary considerably with the leading causes being technical issues, slow ramp up, and grades being lower than anticipated. Strikes have been a less critical issue over recent years however, in 2017 they resulted in exceptional disruption due to strikes at the world’s largest mine Escondida in Chile. In 2020, Covid 19 was the primary cause of supply issues. Regionally, the picture varies considerably. Averaged over the past seven years, Oceania  has the highest apparent disruption rate over 6% of anticipated production, while Africa has had the lowest with 4%. However, in both regions technical disruptions are responsible for a higher share of disruption than the global average. Oceania has also been disproportionately affected by weather related issues. Copper scrap falls under two broad categories. High grade or No. 1 scrap, known as direct use of scrap, is directly used by semi manufacturers supplementing their cathode supply as a source feed. There is also lower grade No. 2 scrap, which contains greater impurities and is used by smelters and refineries. The higher impurities prevent this scrap from being used directly. Looking at historical secondary supply correlations with copper price shows they are strongly correlated with little lag, thus the price strongly determines secondary supply, which acts as a market balancing mechanism. This demonstrates that ramping up secondary supply can happen quickly and reactively with the right incentives. Therefore, secondary supply can be an increasingly important source of copper supply particularly in times of supply shocks and price spikes, if the right policy incentives are in place. However, this also shows the difficulty in sustaining high scrap usage rates in a low price environment. Copper scrap use has decreased since 2015 from 18% to 17% of demand excluding direct use of scrap, and more significantly including direct scrap . This is due to a combination of price, scrap trade restrictions from China, higher energy and shipping costs reducing recycling profitability, the impact of Covid 19, and that EU and US policies promoting domestic scrap collection have not yet taken effect. In climate driven scenarios, however, copper scrap use increases significantly. In the NZE Scenario, the share of secondary supply in total demand rises to 20% by 2030 and 30% in 2040, excluding direct use of scrap. This growth is driven by strong policy efforts to increase collection rates, optimise sorting systems, raise policy mandates for recycling and encourage investment in new processing facilities and smelters. Growing end of life volumes from EV batteries also emerge as a major contributor from 2030. In the NZE Scenario, both sources of secondary supply experience strong growth, with direct use of scrap almost doubling from 2023 to 2040 while secondary production scrap increases by 2,5 times in the same period. Our analysis of project pipeline indicates that a copper primary supply shortfall may develop after 2025 in all three scenarios, despite the signficant growth in secondary supply. Even in the high production case where almost 2 Mt of extra mined supply is available shows a supply gap of 2,2 Mt  to meet demand required by government climate pledges while there is a 4,5 Mt  shortfall to match demand in the NZE Scenario in 2030. This demonstrates the urgency of financing and approving new supply projects given the long lead times to bring online new production. Beyond 2030 the supply gaps continue to expand as demand grows robustly for all scenarios. By 2040, base case supply would have to increase by 80% to meet APS demand while it would have to double to be on track to meet 1,5° C by 2050. Even in the high production case, supply would have to increase by 60% in the APS and 75% in the NZE Scenario by 2040 to meet demand. This anticipated primary supply deficit presents a growing concern for future clean energy technology deployment. The most critical risk for copper is this major supply gap from 2030 onwards, being primarily driven by the strong increase in demand from clean energy technology deployment coupled with the declining ore quality in resources. For instance, the average grade of copper concentrate in Chile has decreased 30% since 2005. Although the implied supply gaps do not mean that achieving transition goals are unattainable, the substantial supply deficit requires a range of solutions to reduce pressure on primary copper supply requirements. This includes considerable supply and demand actions from governments and companies, including investment, substitution, material efficiency and recycling measures. The lack of diversification going forward, particularly in refining is also a key risk for the security of supply of copper. Supply measures First, on the supply side it is essential to stimulate significant investment in new primary supply, including in lower grade plays. Governments can play a key role in supporting strategic projects financially and in streamlining permitting. However, the problem of declining ore quality poses a considerable challenge on the investment side, as there are few major new resources of high quality to exploit, also as a result of subdued exploration spending over the past decade. The tight supply market is likely to increase prices which could support investment in lower grade plays, but pose economic pressures on end users. Many projects in the largest supply region, Latin America, which is also the region facing acute water stress challenges, are also facing critical social and environmental opposition, which has already resulted in the shutdown of the Cobre Panama mine. This underlines the importance of governments and international mining companies working closely with the local community and ensuring benefits are felt to maintain social acceptability. Recycling is one of the most crucial measures to reduce primary copper supply pressure going forward. Copper is one of few materials that can be recycled repeatedly without any loss of quality. Manufacturing scrap is already reasonably well recycled however, end of life scrap and mining waste have significant potential for improvement. With global copper secondary supply currently 17% of demand , but increasing to 30% in 2040 in the NZE Scenario, there is still substantial room for improvement. Given its multitude of applications, the global stock of copper is a critical resource, often referred to as the “urban mine”, and further exploitation of this is crucial. One of the critical issues limiting copper recycling is the difficulty in economically sorting and separating copper and its alloy types from complex electronic post consumer scrap, where the value of recovered copper is often not high enough to match the recycling cost. Second, collection infrastructure is often insufficient in many regions, with limited coordination between supply chain actors. This is compounded by insufficient incentives and information for consumers to recycle copper containing products. Lastly, there is a lack of regulatory mandates on copper recycling and collection. To address these challenges and enhance copper recycling, several actions are necessary. First, implementing comprehensive regulations is pivotal, including recycling rates and content mandates, bans on metals in landfills, and enforcement of design for recycling standards for new products to ensure a larger pool of products that are economically recyclable. Governments can support copper recycling supply chain coordination, which can reduce costs. Policy measures including China’s “Green Fence” policy, restricting the import of low quality copper scrap, has inadvertently resulted in scrap oversupplies in Europe and thus low quality scrap not being accepted in recent years. Therefore, increasing the scrap pool without accompanying investment in processing facilities may be less effective. This reinforces the need for greater global coordination between copper recycling supply chain actors, coupled with improved tracking of global scrap flows. Second, governments can support and scale up collection and sorting infrastructure, including information campaigns and incentives for consumers. Third, support for novel emerging recycling technologies which can efficiently sort and separate copper and its alloys is crucial, for instance sensor based scrap sorting such as X ray fluorescence and laser induced breakdown spectroscopy. Lastly, supportive trade policies and measures promoting the development of new processing capabilities, along with economic incentives aimed at sustaining higher scrap usage in times of lower prices, are essential. Novel technologies offer promise for extracting greater amounts of copper from lower grade plays and materials currently considered waste. For instance, primary sulphide leaching, bioleaching or hydrometallurgy can enable copper recovery from ores below mill head grade, typically considered waste. Advanced separation techniques can also concentrate and upgrade low quality ore. Machine learning has also been used not only to optimise processing operations but also in identifying new resources. Despite their promise, many of these technologies are still emergent and have to be proven at scale. On the demand side, there are multiple measures which can be taken to relieve supply pressure. Increasing material efficiency is key to reducing copper demand. For instance setting mandates and standards for copper intensity in products such as construction pipes or wiring can be effective. Providing financial incentives for consumers to purchase high material efficiency products can also help, particularly in appliances. Copper intensity is being reduced in products such as electric motors and solar panels, where price is often a driver. Substitution of copper where possible is an important measure going forward. Aluminium, though it has 60% of the electronic conductivity of copper, is the primary substitute option for many copper applications. It is also lower cost and lighter weight providing other potential advantages. There are applications where copper cannot be substituted including lithium ion anode current collectors, due to lithium alloying with aluminium at low potentials. In networks aluminium’s lower electrical conductivity requires thicker cables, while the inferior thermal and mechanical properties necessitates greater maintenance, therefore, aluminium is less suitable for high voltage subsea and underground cables . However, in many applications substituting copper is possible with commercial viability with minimal disadvantage. For instance, copper plumbing can often be replaced by plastic pipes such as cross linked polyethylene  or high density polyethylene , though they can be difficult to recycle. Aluminium can replace overhead copper distribution cables, as well as copper windings in some motors, generators and transformers. However, it is also important to note aluminium processing is almost five times more carbon intensive than copper processing therefore, there are energy related implications to substituting copper with aluminium. Lithium is used in a variety of applications such as ceramics or lubricants, as well as in small volumes in pharmaceuticals, but demand structure has deeply transformed over the last ten years, making batteries the dominant driver of global lithium demand growth. Lithium, one of the lightest metals in the periodic table, is the natural candidate for high energy density in batteries due to its superior electrochemical characteristics. Lithium demand is set to rise almost threefold over this decade in the STEPS, expanding faster than all other focus minerals. By 2050, demand reaches 1 200 kt Li in the STEPS and 1 600 kt Li in the APS. In the NZE Scenario, demand increases to 1 700 kt Li by 2050, a tenfold growth from today’s levels, driven by clean energy technologies. Not only is lithium critical to clean energy transitions, but the lithium industry’s ability to ramp up has allowed the EV industry to outpace industry expectations. The EV industry contributes to about 90% of future lithium demand growth between today and 2050 in the APS. Meeting the 1,5 °C climate objective requires particularly rapid growth this decade: in 2030, the EV sector’s annual lithium demand is 40% higher in the NZE Scenario than in the APS. Battery storage is currently a minor consumer of lithium, accounting for about 5% of demand, but its development accelerates by the end of the decade. In the NZE Scenario, lithium demand for battery storage rises to 130 kt Li in 2050, well over ten times the current demand. Lithium ion batteries’ role in fuelling the growth of the EV industry remains unchallenged in the near term. Alternative technologies such as sodium ion batteries and vanadium flow batteries begin to take some shares from lithium ion batteries in low range vehicles and storage markets, but they do not materially alter the prospects for lithium demand in climate driven scenarios. In an alternative case of the NZE Scenario where sodium ion experiences wider popularity within the EV market, total lithium demand could be reduced by 10% in 2030. Likewise, in the case of an early adoption of vanadium flow technologies, demand for lithium in storage applications could be reduced by 6%. If technical challenges around their scale up are overcome, solid state batteries with lithium metal anodes could create a new market for lithium in metal form , of 200 kt Li in 2040 and 330 kt Li in 2050 in the NZE Scenario. Today, annual production of lithium raw materials  amounted to around 190 kt Li in 2023, 70 kt Li from brines and 120 kt Li from hard rock. Lithium production has more than doubled in the past three years. The dominant producer of hard rock lithium is Australia, which produces 84 kt Li in the form of spodumene concentrate, mostly exported to China for refining. Another type of hard rock ore, lepidolite, is being developed, with a boom of production during the high price period of 2021 2023 in China’s Jianxi province, providing 12 kt Li to the market in 2023. Brines are extracted in salt lakes of Latin America , but also from high plateaux in western China . Analysis of announced projects indicates that lithium raw material supply grows to 450 kt Li around 2030 in the base case, again more than doubling the current production, and reaching five times the production of 2020. In the high production case, an additional 70 kt Li of raw material supply could be made available on the market. If announced projects come online as planned, this volume approaches the requirements in the STEPS as well as in the APS in 2030, but is insufficient to stay on the 1,5 °C pathway. Beyond 2030, all scenarios require a further investment in new supplies.to keep pace with the demand growth. Australia remains a key producer of lithium with its spodumene deposits, through brownfield expansions of its major mines  as well as several new projects, such as the Kathleen Valley and Mount Holland mines. Australia also hosts a first of its kind tailings retreatment facility at Greenbushes, designed to extract further lithium from anterior mining waste. In the base case, Australia remains the largest producer in 2030, accounting for a third of world production. China is the world’s largest consumer of lithium as well as the world’s largest refiner, but traditionally sourced lithium feedstock from mines overseas. Significant efforts have been made to develop domestic supplies, with notable investments in domestic mines from downstream manufacturers, such as CATL. The Chinese share of global lithium mining has steadily increased since 2016, from 6% to 17% in 2023. In the base case, it overtakes Chile and becomes the world’s second largest lithium producer in the mid 2020s. Latin America has traditionally been a major lithium supplier with Chile’s Salar de Atacama. Chile remains the continent’s largest producer, but there are growing interests in Argentina, with a particularly strong pipeline of brine extraction projects. Based on announced projects, Argentina attracts over 80% of future capital investments for lithium in Latin America, with investors from all regions, from the United States and Australia, as well as Europe , China  and Korea . By 2030, Chile’s base case annual supply grows to 56 kt Li, but Argentina emerges as a close contender, with 47 kt Li of production. Despite significant lithium resources in Bolivia , projects have yet to emerge there. The country has signed an agreement with Russia’s Rosatom and China’s CITIC Guoan Group to develop its lithium resources and recently launched an international tender for lithium extraction, although significant challenges remain. Lithium mining is a recent phenomenon in Africa, where Zimbabwean production has recently ramped up, with 9 kt Li of lithium exported every year as concentrates of various hard rock ores . Some informal artisanal and small scale  mining activities have been reported in Nigeria, a phenomenon new to lithium, but frequent for other metals such as cobalt, gold, tin, tungsten and tantalum. Additional industrial capacities are planned in Zimbabwe, but other countries could follow suit, with projects in Ethiopia, Mali, Namibia, and possibly the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Ghana. In 2030, Africa's total lithium production in the base case rises to 53 kt Li, and further to 70 kt Li in the high production case. There are many projects in the pipeline at their early stages of development, but price volatility may delay the projects coming up, particularly those outside of incumbent country producers, with implications for long term supply and diversification. Two regions have historically dominated the supply of lithium chemicals, with three distinct business models. Refining of lithium rich brines of China and Latin America is done locally, and lithium is then exported as a refined chemical , whether carbonate or hydroxide. This process traditionally involved evaporation ponds, making this relatively water intensive. To reduce water requirements, a diversity of new “direct lithium extraction” technologies are under development, but may involve higher operating costs, China currently dominates the refining of hard rock ore, from domestic resources, but also by refining the majority of lithium mined from hard rock overseas, notably from African countries and Australia. Lithium is generally mined and then locally processed into an exportable concentrate, but some African facilities, such as in Namibia, were built to directly ship ore to China. Some operations focus on conversion of one chemical into another, notably lithium carbonate to hydroxide, covering about 20% of current hydroxide supply, a technology dominated by China. Lithium chemicals can be recycled from secondary resources, typically “black mass” either from end of life batteries or manufacturing scrap from gigafactories. Historically, battery recycling facilities focused on higher value metals, such as nickel and cobalt, and lithium was often not recovered. Depending on prices, the uptake of lithium recycling may require policy incentives. A number of recycling companies are also achieving 90% recycling rates for lithium, and policy makers are strengthening recycling targets significantly, such as with the EU battery regulation, all of which could help scale up secondary supply of lithium. In the APS, the share of secondary lithium supply increases from a low level today to 10% by 2040. By 2030, lithium carbonate production nearly doubles to 220 kt Li in the base case, and possibly 260 kt Li in the high production case, but the project pipeline leaves little space for diversification. The top three country share remains close to 98%, covered by Argentina and Chile  as well as China, which remains the major hub both for its domestic extractive activities, but also for the refining of hard rock overseas into carbonates. Projects being planned in other regions focus on lithium hydroxide, producing 170 kt Li in 2030 in the base case, and 185 kt Li in the high production case, more than twice the current production. The interest that investors take in hydroxide can be attributed to its dominance in North American and European demand, where the recent gigafactory projects almost exclusively focus on high performance chemistries that require this chemical. The higher value of hydroxide is another aspect weighed by project developers, who anticipated a price premium relative to lithium carbonate. China traditionally dominated refining of lithium from hard rock ore into hydroxide and continues doing so in the base case. It remains the main player with 60% hydroxide market share in 2030. Until recently, Australia was entirely dependent on China for the refining of its lithium ores, but two refineries are currently ramping up to produce lithium hydroxide, producing 30 kt Li by 2030. In other advanced economies, investors are also making bets on conversion facilities, importing carbonates and refining them into hydroxide closer to their consumers, with large plants including Albemarle’s Megaflex projects, as well as AMG’s Bitterfeld plant inaugurated in 2022 in Germany and POSCO’s planned conversion plant in Korea, as well as recycling plants. In North America and Europe, mining projects tend to be integrated, associating a mine with a hydroxide refinery. Projects are also being considered outside of lithium mining countries. Indonesia’s growth in nickel rich cathode supply chain makes conversion plants likely to emerge there. Three lithium refining projects are also being considered in Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. However, refining projects have yet to emerge in Africa. Recent price volatility may lead to short term supply responses, discouraging investment for new supplies. In February 2024, production in the world’s largest mine, Australia’s Greenbushes, was slowed, and other lithium producers announced plans to review their operations. Operating cost is one of the major considerations in production suspension decisions, but it is not the only factor. Those with long term offtake agreements might continue even though their cost profiles are high, which could put additional pressure on prices beyond what supply and demand dynamics suggest. Symmetrically, integrated projects are reducing production, despite being on the lower end of the cost curve , such as Australian hard rock players. There are risks that the current low price environment may reduce investments in lithium projects, including those offering better ESG performance or outside of incumbent regions, which would affect medium to long term supplies. Many recent projects had been planned during periods of higher prices, and their viability may be reassessed if investors’ long term expectations are revised. While the market is well supplied at the moment, continued investment flows are required to develop projects to serve long term demand and diversification goals. At 2024 values, the current project pipeline in the base case requires USD 13 billion of investment for raw material production, with an additional USD 7 billion required for the high production case. Analysis of the project pipeline suggests that significant regional disparities exist in the capital costs for developing new projects. In particular, European and American lithium extractive projects generally require higher upfront costs. Business models often compensate for this disadvantage through integrated approaches offering highly refined products, but volatility in the refined chemical markets is putting price assumptions at risk. In the long term, concerns remain regarding geographical and ownership concentration. Two trends are emerging. First, efforts to increase domestic feedstock supplies from dominant chemical producers , notably progress achieved by China researching new deposits and promoting domestic mining activities, with the financial support of domestic downstream battery manufacturers. Geological considerations put Chinese plays at a competitive disadvantage historically, but new deposits under development may be changing this picture. Notably, miners are developing domestic spodumene projects, the same type of ore as Australia’s lower cost lithium mines. The incumbent players’ endeavours to procure resources abroad indicate that sustained supply concentration may exist through ownership , Chinese enterprises own most domestic ventures as well as major interests in Australian, Argentinian and African ventures. Finally, the lithium market structure is sensitive to the respective market shares of different battery chemistries, with growing supply chain segmentation between two chemicals: lithium hydroxide and lithium carbonate. Lithium hydroxide is required for nickel rich chemistries, while carbonates are used both in the older generation of NMC chemistries and the LFP market. In the APS, EV requirements for carbonate and hydroxide are expected to rise in parallel, with hydroxide being required for 55% of total demand by 2030. In an alternative case where LFP takes a larger share, demand for hydroxide demand would be 25% less, calling for readjustments in regional sourcing strategies and project development planning. Nickel is used in a wide range of applications and is important for the broad economy with its use for alloys and stainless steel, as well as in the clean energy sector. The largest applications in the clean energy sector are within EV batteries, but nickel is also used in low emissions power generation, such as in wind and geothermal energy. Global nickel demand remained steady between 2018 and 2020 around 2,4 Mt, but then began to increase rapidly, reaching around 3,1 Mt in 2023. Demand is set to grow further in all scenarios, increasing to 4,5 Mt in 2030 in the STEPS. In the APS, demand growth is slightly higher, rising to 4,8 Mt in 2030. In the NZE Scenario, demand increases more rapidly to 5,6 Mt in 2030 as more EVs and low emissions power generation are deployed. By 2040, demand under the NZE Scenario is slightly higher than the APS, but sees a larger fall to 2050 due to lower demand for uses in stainless steel as secondary supplies increase. Historically, demand for nickel was primarily for its use in alloys : in 2015, 75% of nickel’s total demand was for alloys. However, from 2020 to 2023 this shifted substantially and demand from the clean energy sector became the main factor behind a 30% increase in overall nickel demand over this period. This was primarily due to the increasing use of nickel rich EV batteries, but was also driven by the use of nickel in low emissions power. In 2023, the share of clean energy applications in total demand crossed 15%. Looking to the future, nickel demand for alloys continues to play a large role in overall nickel demand with around 50% of market share in 2050 under the STEPS. In both the APS and NZE Scenario, the market share of nickel in alloys falls to around 35%, in part due to the higher clean energy demand but also due to lower material requirements for steel. Nickel use in clean energy technologies continues to drive overall growth in nickel demand. In all scenarios, clean energy technology’s share in total demand continues to rise, peaking at around 40% in the STEPS and around 55% in the APS and NZE Scenario by 2040 before falling slightly due to lower demand for nickel rich chemistries. However, the primary driver in nickel’s demand growth continues to be EV batteries in all scenarios, whose demand increases by approximately ninefold between today and 2050 in the APS and NZE Scenario. There are two types of nickel ore: laterite and sulphide. Laterite ores are primarily found in Indonesia, New Caledonia, the Philippines, and Australia, and sulphide ores are primarily found in Australia, Canada, Russia, and China. Over the last five years, nickel mining has experienced significant absolute increases in the amount of material mined, as well as a shift in the type of ore mined. From 2018 to 2023, mined nickel supply increased by almost 1,5 times from 2,4 Mt to 3,5 Mt. This increase was primarily driven by the rapid expansion of mining in Indonesia, which saw a tripling in mined nickel output between 2018 and 2023, rising from just 0,6 Mt in 2018 to 1,8 Mt in 2023. Increases were also seen in Brazil, New Caledonia and Canada. There has also been an increasing shift in the type of nickel ore, moving away from historically mined nickel sulphide to laterite. From 2018 to 2023, laterite mining nearly doubled from 1,5 Mt to 2,8 Mt, whereas sulphide mining fell slightly from 0,8 Mt to 0,7 Mt. This led to the share of laterites in total supply growing from 65% to 80%. In our base case, this trend is expected to continue until it reaches almost 90% in 2040, primarily driven by the growth in nickel mining in Indonesia, which almost doubles over the same period. The mined nickel market has been increasingly geographically concentrated since 2018, with Indonesia’s share of global production increasing from 25% in 2018 to 52% in 2023. Looking ahead, in the base case, mined nickel supply is expected to continue growing to 4,4 Mt by 2040, marking a one third increase from today. As our high production case assumes several early stage projects come online, mined nickel supply grows to around 6 Mt by 2040, almost doubling. Geographical concentration is set to increase further in the base case, with the top three producing countries' share rising from 70% today to 83% by 2040. However, in the high production case, more projects come online from diversified regions, notably Australia and Brazil, bringing the top three countries' share slightly down to 81% by 2040. In the near term, there could be some oversupply in the mined nickel market as a result of high investment into nickel developments in the last five years. In the longer term, expected supply from announced projects in the base case may fall short of meeting primary supply requirements in both the STEPS and APS by 2030. Additional projects that are assumed to come online in the high production case will need to materialise in this case. In the NZE Scenario, planned and high potential projects fall short of primary supply requirements by 2030, requiring new projects to come through. There are two types of primary nickel products: high purity Class 1 products  and lower purity Class 2 products . Battery cathodes need nickel sulphate, which has historically been produced from Class 1 products. There are many stages of the supply chain to produce both Class 1 and Class 2 products. Intermediate products such as mixed hydroxide precipitate  or mixed sulphide precipitate  are produced through hydrometallurgical processes such as bioleaching, and nickel matte is produced through smelting. Primary products such as nickel metals and nickel oxides, nickel pig iron  and ferronickel are produced through processes such as blast furnaces and electric arc furnaces, which can be used in end use markets as final products. This section refers to the latter when discussing refined products. Similar to nickel mining, refined nickel production has significantly increased over the last five years. From 2018 to 2023, refined nickel products grew 1,4fold to 3,1 Mt, primarily driven by growth in Indonesia, which saw an almost fivefold increase in production. Geographical concentration of the top producing country, Indonesia, grew from 30% to 45%, whereas geographical concentration of the top three producers grew from 50% to 70%. Looking ahead, analysis of the project pipeline indicates that refined nickel production continues to grow in the base case, to 3,9 Mt in 2040. The largest driver of this growth is in NPI and nickel metals, each growing by around a quarter to 2040. This production is primarily driven by Indonesia, which sees an over 1,5 fold increase in refined nickel product production to 2040, primarily in the form of NPI, ferronickel and nickel metals. The top producing country , Indonesia , continues to maintain a dominating market share, growing from 45% in 2023 to 59% in 2040. The high production case does not see a much higher refined nickel supply. While there is slightly more production in countries outside of the dominant producer, such as Australia, the level of concentration barely changes compared with the base case. For use in EV batteries, nickel needs to be further processed into nickel sulphate, which is then used as input into battery cathodes. Historically, nickel sulphate has been obtained through refining sulphide ores into nickel matte or nickel metals and oxides pellets and then into battery grade nickel as it requires high content nickel. Recent nickel market developments, including high prices and Indonesia’s rise in prominence within the supply chain, have led to using MHP and MSP, sourced from laterite ores, as inputs for nickel sulphates. There has also been a rise in converting NPI and ferronickel , typically used in stainless steel applications , into nickel matte, which is then processed into nickel sulphate. From 2018 to 2023, the most significant increase in inputs for nickel sulphate production was from matte via sulphide ores. Over the same period, there was also a rise in the production of nickel sulphate from matte via laterite ore and the intermediate MHP derived from laterite ore. In the base case, we anticipate this shift towards utilising matte via laterite and intermediates from laterite ores to continue through 2030. There is also large growth in the utilisation of a mix of inputs into nickel sulphate production, with the largest absolute increase seen in a combination of Class 1 and laterite ore inputs, through either MHP or matte. Mixes combining Class 1 and recycled material or scrap also increase to 2030. In our high production case, while slightly more sulphate projects that utilise matte via sulphide may come online, the primary input drivers are expected to remain as laterite ore inputs. The surge in processing laterite ore for nickel sulphate production has been chiefly propelled by Indonesia, and the country is poised to maintain its leading role in driving growth in this sector. In the base case, Indonesia sees an over twofold increase in MHP production and an increase of 1,4 times in matte production by 2030. In the near term, nickel sulphate may be adequately supplied to 2025. However, in both the APS and NZE Scenario, nickel sulphate requirements exceed expected sulphate supply from announced projects by 2030 and beyond, even with increases in sulphate supply from secondary production as more EV batteries are deployed and recycled. However, new sulphate capacity can be introduced relatively quickly , within 18 24 months , and we expect that supply can be relatively responsive to developments within the EV battery industry. The recent low price environment for nickel prompted several nickel producers to implement cost cutting measures at existing operations. For instance, First Quantum's nickel mine announced production cuts, while BHP's Nickel West operations reduced its workforce. Additionally, other producers, such as Glencore's Koniambo nickel mine, placed their operations into care and maintenance. Consequently, nickel production in 2023 was lower than anticipated, with announced nickel mining production cuts and closures totalling around 80 kt. While the continuation of low nickel prices supports the growth of the EV market by keeping battery prices low, there is a potential downside: it may lead to further closures of nickel mines or halt ongoing developments. Operations such as BHP's Nickel West are contemplating putting their mines under care and maintenance, while New Caledonia's production faces the risk of investor loss. Reports have surfaced of producers halting project development due to nickel's low price, which threatens the long term profitability of projects such as IGO's Cosmos nickel project. This risk of closure and development halts is especially pronounced for projects with higher costs and lower margins, often located in regions beyond the current dominant producers. We have identified approximately 25 operating or potential mines that could be at risk if the current low nickel price persists, primarily located in Canada and New Caledonia. While closures of these nickel mines and production cuts may not immediately result in a significant undersupply of mined nickel, given that the market is currently well supplied, they could lead to a shortfall in supply compared with medium to long term demand in the APS and NZE Scenario. The total supply loss would be around 360 kt of supply in 2030 and 280 kt in 2040, respectively, almost 10% of supply in each year. The larger concern stemming from the continuation of the current low price environment is the potential closure of high cost nickel mines, which would further reduce the diversity of supply in an already geographically concentrated market. If all at risk nickel mines were to close, this would increase Indonesia's market share — the top nickel mining country — and the top three countries’ share by around 6 percentage points in both 2030 and 2040. In both the base case and high production case, Indonesia’s role in the global nickel market continues to expand as the country boosts its mining, refining and nickel sulphate production capacities. Indonesia’s laterites ores are converted into nickel ready for conversion to battery grade nickel by two methods: through processing to MHP or MSP through hydrometallurgical processes such as HPAL or the production of ferronickel or NPI through electric furnaces such as RKEFs, which is then converted into nickel matte. Emissions per tonne of nickel vary by processing method. Currently, the emissions intensity of nickel production is estimated to be about 65 t CO2 e to 105 t CO2 e for RKEF and 10 t CO2 e to 60 t CO2 e for HPAL depending on the source of electricity and thermal energy or reductant utilised. These variations between processes primarily stem from the higher energy intensity of the laterite to NPI via RKEF process, which requires more electricity , around 500 kWh more per tonne of feed , as well as a greater direct use of carbon intensive chemical reductants and heat energy sources. In 2023, the primary production route of nickel in Indonesia was RKEF , which accounts for almost 90% of production, resulting in an estimated 150 Mt CO2 emissions from nickel production in the country. In both supply cases, operational ramp ups and new projects in Indonesia lead to a shift in the production mix towards less energy intensive processes. By 2030, the share of RKEF production is projected to decrease to around 80%, remaining stable through 2040. Meanwhile, HPAL is expected to increase its share of the production mix to approximately 15% by 2030. Additionally, OSBF processes also see a growing role, rising from 2% of the production mix in 2023 to 6% by 2030 in the base case. This transition away from RKEF towards less energy intensive processes could, on its own, lead to a reduction in the overall CO2 intensity per tonne of refined nickel in Indonesia, from around 80 t CO2 per tonne to around 75 t CO2 per tonne by 2030. Despite this decrease in average intensity, if Indonesia’s power and thermal energy sources for nickel processing remain dependent on coal, as they do today, absolute CO2 emissions from nickel refining could be 1,4 higher in 2030 and 1,6 times higher in 2040, compared with 2023. Indonesia is working to shift its energy mix to cleaner sources, which, in line with a long term goal of reaching net zero emissions by 2060, could help to reduce the carbon impact of the country’s nickel production. There are indications of some near term progress by industry players. For example, one company is developing several HPAL projects while exploring replacement of coal with lower emissions alternatives such as gas and bioenergy. However, significant work remains to lower the carbon footprint of nickel operations, with measures that address energy demand requirements and emissions from power, chemical and thermal energy processes. As an illustration, if the Indonesian production processes projected in this report’s base case were to reduce their CO2 intensity to the "best case" levels identified in the Minviro paper, which assumes that processing operations utilise renewable electricity and, where possible, non coal thermal energy and reductants, their average CO2 intensity would decline by 25% . Absolute CO2 emissions would be similar to today’s levels in 2030 and 20% higher in 2040 than today, despite the almost 65% increase in production. Moreover, refining and processing operations often cause air, land and water pollution, in addition to significant carbon emissions, and there are trade offs between the two commonly used processes for converting laterite ores to intermediates for battery grade nickel. The process of using HPAL results in high waste production but has lower emissions intensity, whereas RKEF results in less waste but extremely high carbon emissions. There are other environmental issues that could arise from Indonesia’s growing role in the nickel market. The shallow, open pit mining methods used in Indonesian nickel production have led to significant deforestation and the clearing of farmland. Research estimates that the direct land footprint of nickel mining in Indonesia amounts to 42 m2 per tonne of nickel contained in ore. Under the base case production, this would equate to around 800 km2 of additional land use impact between today and 2030. In addition, tailings management associated with HPAL production is a persistent issue. While initial proposals for deep sea tailings placement were dropped over environmental concerns, the alternative, land based dry tailings stacking, still faces technical challenges driven in part by Indonesia’s warm and humid climate. Hydrometallurgical waste from HPAL plants can be neutralised, dried and compacted by lining with geotextiles or thick clay layers to prevent waste stream leakage. However, significant investments in drainage and filtration systems are required to mitigate the impacts of high rainfall. One of the main drivers behind high emissions intensity of Indonesia’s nickel is the reliance of the country’s power on fossil fuels, especially coal, which make up 81% of the on grid electricity mix. Approximately a quarter of current coal generated power in the country is not grid connected, known as “captive power”, and serves energy intensive industries, especially minerals processing, which are viewed as important to realising Indonesia’s industrial strategy. Coal plants integrated with industries that support value addition in the natural resources sector or have a major contribution to job creation and/or national economic growth are exempted from the moratorium on development in Perpres No. 112/2022. Over the last ten years, Indonesia has seen an increase in captive coal power capacity, which rose nearly eightfold from 1,4 GW to 10,8 GW. Without a shift in the business plans, technology choices and regulation of such plants, growth is likely to continue, with estimates of the pipeline for new captive coal power ranging from 14,4 GW to over 20 GW by 2030. Around two thirds of existing captive coal plants service the operating nickel smelters in the country, which are located in places that are not well integrated with the grid connected power system. Growth in smelter capacity and captive power to support it was driven in part by the country’s export ban of nickel ores in 2020. In Central Sulawesi, the location of the Morowali Industrial Park, there is almost 1 Mt of production capacity and about 2,7 GW of captive coal power in operation, with a further 2,8 GW under construction. The locations of many of the other nickel refining operations in the country , Obi Island and Weda Bay , also have many operating and planned captive power operations. To prevent a substantial rise in CO2 emissions as nickel production expands, Indonesia will need to accelerate the uptake of low emissions alternatives to captive coal power and find ways to phase out existing captive coal plants, as part of an overall strategy to shift Indonesia’s nickel sector to a low emissions pathway. The Just Energy Transition Partnership plans to develop a study on transitioning the captive power sector, building on Perpres No. 11/2022. Indonesia also released an Indonesian Taxonomy for Sustainable Finance which incorporates provisions for financing coal plants, aiming to expedite their closure. However, according to the taxonomy, new captive coal plants may be classified as a transition asset, and thus still eligible for finance, if involved in the processing and mining of critical minerals for the energy transition, such as nickel. As low cost, high emissions Indonesian nickel has come at scale to the global nickel market, market stakeholders have called on policy makers to support pricing mechanisms that can support the market for more sustainably produced nickel. However, the London Metal Exchange  rejected calls to create traded contract specifications that would support a price premium for low emissions or responsible nickel, citing concerns about market liquidity and interest as well as a lack of an agreed definition of “green.” Instead, the LME has highlighted its partnership with Metalshub, a digital platform for metals procurement and trading, as a way to help market participants assess potential premiums for "cleaner" nickel. Metalshub, in collaboration with a consultancy Minviro, plans to integrate nickel’s carbon footprint data into the Metalshub procurement platform. While Metalshub does not play an active role in facilitating price determination in the way that an exchange like LME does, its recent announcement to begin reporting volumes of low carbon Class 1 nickel could contribute to market based price discovery for a “green premium.” LME and Metalshub have defined “low carbon” nickel as having a carbon footprint lower than 20 t CO2 e. Similarly, Fastmarkets and Benchmark Mineral Intelligence, price reporting agencies, have proposed launching price assessments to distinguish cleaner nickel. The Fastmarkets specification would use self reported transaction data to identify whether, and at what levels, the market is paying a premium for nickel briquettes with a carbon footprint of less than 18 t CO2 e, whereas Benchmark’s assessment considers transaction data for nickel sulphate sourced from companies assessed to be “industry leading” within their proprietary ESG scoring system. The Fastmarkets and Metalshub emissions thresholds would exclude ferronickel and NPI production due to their relatively high carbon footprints but may still allow some production from HPAL pathways. However, it should be noted that the non emissions environmental impacts associated with HPAL routes may require a more holistic view of sustainability that goes beyond the carbon footprint alone. Despite efforts by market participants, it is difficult to imagine a significant premium emerging voluntarily, at least at a level that would support higher cost producers to restart or maintain production. Processing and manufacturing industries are sensitive to raw material input prices, and voluntarily paying above market price for feedstock is likely to significantly impact their competitiveness. Regulatory intervention may need to play a key role in incentivising the production and consumption of responsibly sourced materials. Subsidies or tax credits could be used to support the production of responsibly sourced nickel, with those provided under existing provisions such as the Inflation Reduction Act given only to producers that source a certain percentage of their nickel supply from “responsibly sourced” supplies or whose upstream greenhouse gas emissions are below a certain threshold. In addition to its nickel finance assistance programme, Australia is considering introducing nickel production tax credits similar to those in the IRA, which considers giving a production tax credit of 10% to critical minerals producers. Such tax credits might be tied to emissions, giving preferential rates to low emissions producers. Pricing differentiation between different sources of nickel could also be established through carbon pricing and trading schemes. The European Union's Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism , which imposes a carbon tax on imported energy intensive goods, could be expanded to include other raw materials such as nickel or the embedded emissions in downstream products, such as stainless steel. Disclosure policies, such as the EU Battery Regulation which by 2025 will mandate battery producers to disclose the complete carbon footprint of EV batteries over their life cycle, could also make it easier for purchasers and consumers to determine the emissions of different nickel sources, which could support voluntary adoption. At a minimum, all these actions would require policy makers to develop criteria to distinguish between supplies based on ESG performance. Establishing a common understanding of what supplies should be prioritised would require collaboration among industry stakeholders, policy makers and environmental experts to develop a robust and widely accepted framework that takes into account not only greenhouse gas emissions but also other environmental and social impacts across the supply chain. All of these policies and industry actions should ensure that producers follow the principle of additionality, ensuring that product emissions are meaningfully reduced over the longer term. Calculations of emissions also need to be meaningful and across the supply chain, avoiding “greenwashing”. Policy makers can support this by creating regulations that mandate reporting and disclosure requirements for emissions. Examples include the US Environmental Protection Agency's Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program  which requires large metal manufacturing facilities to report their emissions annually under specific methodologies that incorporate those of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change . On the demand side, industry can also take actions to start incentivising responsible sourcing. For example, the First Movers Coalition aims to leverage the collective purchasing power of major market participants to create early markets for low emissions steel, aluminium, cement, etc. By committing to purchase a proportion of their future supply from low emissions sources, coalition members aim to send a demand signal to incentivise clean material production at scale. This type of approach could also be taken on a bilateral basis by industry players in the downstream EV market. Some of these players have already showed a preference for low emissions nickel, such as Vale’s long term offtake agreement with Tesla, which emphasised secure access to low emissions nickel. Cobalt demand has grown strongly in recent years, with traditional usage supplemented by uses in EV batteries. In 2023, the non clean energy technology sector accounted for around 70% of total consumption, while EV batteries accounted for the remainder. Within the non clean energy sector, portable batteries used in electronics represented the largest share. Although absolute demand sees a slight uptick, its proportion of total cobalt demand diminishes to 25% by 2040 in both the APS and NZE Scenario. Cobalt demand for EVs triples in the STEPS by 2040, grows by more than fourfold by 2040 in the APS and 4,5 times in the NZE Scenario from today. EV batteries take up the largest share of total cobalt consumption by the end of this decade, and their share rises to 60% by 2040 in the NZE Scenario. While demand for EV batteries continues to rise, the recent trend towards low cobalt or cobalt free batteries is slowing the pace of long term growth compared with other battery metals such as lithium and nickel. In recent years, LFP cathode chemistries have rapidly expanded their market share in the EV industry, reaching a 40% share in 2023. Alternatives to lithium ion batteries, particularly sodium ion batteries, are also gaining traction in the EV market. It will take time for this relatively new technology to reach a full commercialisation, but the rise of alternatives implies a smaller piece of the EV battery pie left for cobalt. Even among the traditionally popular NMC chemistries, the market is increasingly favouring chemistries with lower cobalt intensity. However, while alternative batteries with low or no cobalt are gaining traction, the overall size of the EV market continues to expand, supporting continued demand growth in the medium to long term. Cobalt’s role decreases steadily for battery storage, reaching negligible levels by 2050 in both the APS and NZE Scenario. Compared with EVs, storage batteries are not limited by space constraints, so the market is heading towards cheaper alternatives with lower energy density such as LFP cathode chemistries or sodium ion batteries, neither of which contains cobalt. Outside of batteries, cobalt was used the most in superalloys integral to the military and aerospace industries due to its pivotal role in providing strong resistance to corrosion, extreme temperature and high pressure. Demand for cobalt in superalloys continues to remain robust. The industries consuming these superalloys are typically less price sensitive, thus ensuring relatively stable demand, as evidenced by recent price trends where cobalt metal alloys consistently maintained higher prices than cobalt sulphate during periods of price downturns. The cobalt market is well supplied today. In the near term, the current oversupply may continue with supplies from new mines and previously stockpiled volumes coming online in the Democratic Republic of the Congo . In the long term, global mined supply begins to subside from 2030 as reserves in the DRC deplete although strong growth from Indonesia partly offsets this decline. Future cobalt supply could face major challenges as the current low price environment makes financing new projects more challenging. Mined cobalt production in the DRC is poised for significant growth in the near future as several new mines ramp up their output. China based CMOC's Tenke Fungurume mine  resumed exports in April 2023 after resolving a royalty dispute with Gécamines, the DRC state owned mining company. TFM's second phase expansion began operations in the second half of 2023, with output estimated to reach 30 kt by 2027. Another major project by CMOC, the Kisanfu copper cobalt mine started production in the first half of 2023 and is expected to contribute an average of 30 kt of cobalt per year by 2026 once it reaches full capacity. The Kinsevere copper mine's expansion under the China based MMG Group, commenced operations in 2023 and is anticipated to produce 5 kt of cobalt annually in the near term. The cobalt output from China based Jinchuan Group International Resources, which operates an open pit Ruashi mine and is currently advancing the underground Musonoi mine in the DRC, is expected to surge by 75% to 10 kt in 2024. These sizeable new cobalt mines are anticipated to contribute significant volumes to the near term supply pool, countering the slower production from non Chinese major cobalt miners. In the long term, existing mines in the DRC are likely to reduce their supply or close down due to diminishing ore grade and increasing production cost, resulting in a 15% drop in production from today’s level by 2040 in the base case. Glencore’s Mutanda mine may experience a reduction of up to 15% in annual production due to the depletion of oxide ore deposits on the surface. To sustain production levels, the cobalt rich DRC would need to explore new deposits, re evaluate old tailings, or transition its open pit mines to underground operations. It is important to highlight that the DRC still possesses substantial high grade resources. However, unlocking this potential necessitates new investments, a task that may pose challenges during periods of weak cobalt prices and ample market supply although robust copper prices could help. As of 2023, Indonesia had ascended to become the world’s second largest cobalt supplier. Indonesia’s cobalt production rose by almost 20 times in the last four years since the Indonesian government nickel ore export ban drove an influx of investments in domestic nickel cobalt processing operations including HPAL facilities. In the base case, Indonesia’s cobalt production more than doubles to 2030, reaching 50 kt. In the high production case, its supply is estimated to reach 80 kt by 2030, constituting 23% of global cobalt supply, nudging the DRC’s production share down from 65% in 2023 to 50% by 2040. Cobalt is mostly extracted as a by product of copper ore or nickel ore. Traditionally, the primary mineral from which cobalt is refined as a by product has been copper due to the abundance of copper cobalt mines in the DRC. Copper accounts for almost 70% of the primary mineral of cobalt’s supply today. However, declining ore quality of existing copper cobalt mines in the DRC limits its supply post 2030 in the base case, reducing copper’s share to below 60% by 2040. Primary cobalt mines continue to take a small part, most of which comes from ASM in the DRC. Its share takes up less than 5% of the total cobalt primary supply throughout 2040 in our base case. Nickel plays a growing role as a primary mineral for cobalt production with the rise of Indonesia’s nickel production. Today, 30% of the primary mineral refined into cobalt has been from nickel plays, and this share rises to almost 40% by 2040 in our base case. With the weak cobalt prices persisting, mining projects are witnessing delays as project developers are forced to seek additional funding for future production. Trafigura, a commodity trading company, is now forced to seek an additional USD 200 million to USD 300 million investment, which is worth almost half the initial USD 600 million syndicated financing and marketing deal from 2022 with Chemaf SA, a mining company operating in the DRC. Had the project been completed by the end of 2023 as originally planned, the Mutoshi mine alone would have become the world’s third largest cobalt mine with capacity reaching 16 kt of annual cobalt hydroxide in its full form. High inflation has compounded the challenges posed by the low cobalt prices. This caused the suspension of final construction of Idaho Cobalt Operations in March 2023, which would have been the only primary cobalt mine in the United States with an annual production capacity of 2 kt. The CEO of the project’s developer, Jervois Global, argued that prices would have to double or additional government support would be needed to complete the construction. Despite the unfavourable market conditions, there are some developers willing to finance new projects. Kazakh miner Eurasian Resources Group announced it would invest USD 800 million to revamp its Comide copper and cobalt mine including the construction of hydrometallurgical plant and drilling programme in October 2023. The plant is set to come online in different phases which would reach up to 15 kt of annual cobalt hydroxide output once its full capacity is met. The weak prices also triggered actions or considerations to stockpile cobalt. China has notably taken advantage of the low cobalt price. The National Food and Strategic Reserves Administration, the government’s stockpiling body, agreed to buy around 5 kt of cobalt in July 2023 and 3 kt in October. As the low price persists, there could be additional stockpiling schemes introduced from the government. The United States also reportedly considered adding cobalt to its stockpiling list. While stockpiling plans of the Defense Logistics Agency  that run from October 2023 to September 2024 ultimately did not include cobalt, the United States’ efforts to diversify its cobalt supply sources coupled with low commodity price could lead to new stockpiling activities. After mining, copper cobalt or nickel cobalt concentrates are obtained through mineral processing techniques including crushing, screening, drying, flotation or magnetic separation . Then, primary extraction using hydrometallurgical or pyrometallurgical methods take place typically close to the mines. This process produces matte, oxides, nickel cobalt intermediates, and other co products, which are then usually shipped overseas for further refining. Cobalt refining continues to remain geographically concentrated in our base case. Today, China is responsible for more than 75% of the global refined cobalt supply, and its share remains at a similar level to 2040 in the base case. Finland and Japan account for around 9% and 3% of refined cobalt supply in 2023 respectively, and their shares sustain to 2040. Among many forms of refined chemistries, cobalt sulphate used in EV batteries sees the largest increase in demand. In the base case, cobalt sulphate supply increases by more than 50% by 2030 and more than doubles in the high production case. This helps to meet the sulphate supply requirements in the APS in 2030, helped by growing secondary supply. The ASM sector in the DRC has historically made up a significant but variable share of global cobalt supply, accounting for an average 5 15% of the total. The sector is highly variable depending on the price of cobalt, with higher prices incentivising more ASM activities. Due to lower cobalt prices, in 2023 ASM made up approximately 4 kt of cobalt supply, accounting for only 2% of demand. In our base case, supply from ASM increases to 7 kt in 2030 and almost 10 kt in 2040. However, as global mined supply climbs in response to demand for cobalt for the energy transition, ASM accounts for a smaller share of supply moving forward. Due to ASM’s sensitivity to market fluctuations, the sector has historically played an important role in maintaining market stability: ASM sites take much less time to begin production compared with larger industrial operations, allowing traders and producers to top up supplies during shortages or sell off volumes when other sources are in surplus. This flexibility helps to balance supply and demand, with ASM acting as swing producers. However, as ASM supplies are projected to take up a smaller share of supply moving forward, their role as swing producers may be diminished. The sector has historically been associated with human rights abuses due to its unregulated and informal nature. Disengaging entirely from ASM as a strategy does not constitute responsible sourcing and may exacerbate the root causes of child labour. To varying extents, ASM offers socio economic advantages losing these may heighten the local community’s vulnerability to other forms of exploitation. There have been various efforts to formalise the sector over the years. In 2019, the DRC government created the Entreprise Générale du Cobalt , a state owned enterprise which is intended to hold the sole right to purchase, treat, transform, sell and export cobalt extracted by artisanal and small scale miners in the DRC. The entity released a Responsible Sourcing Standard document in 2021, outlining its steps for formalising the sector. However, the EGC has not been fully operationalised since it was established. Formalisation of the sector could mitigate the worst forms of child labour, but could bring some unintended consequences as well. Addressing poverty at its core is essential for a lasting solution. This requires ongoing collaboration across actors and sustained community engagement. Cobalt mining practices are becoming more energy intensive as copper cobalt mines in the DRC near depletion and HPAL facilities in Indonesia take on a larger role in global cobalt extraction. As existing DRC mines edge closer to depletion, the country would have to develop new mines or dig wider and deeper in their existing open pit and underground mines. The process of seeking better quality copper cobalt ores would involve significant energy uses and emissions. Moreover, the increasing cobalt extraction from nickel mines in Indonesia is raising concerns on top of the existing environmental challenges. HPAL technology uses sulphuric acid at high pressure and temperature to recover nickel and cobalt separately from low grade deposits of nickel laterite ore. Additionally, new coal plants have often been added near HPAL facilities to accommodate an increase in power demand and provide affordable source of power to enhance the price competitiveness of mineral supply. In recent years, there has been a notable increase of the China backed Indonesia based HPAL operations such as PT Halmahera Persada Lygend, PT Huayue Nickel Cobalt, PT QMB New Energy Materials and PT Huayou. In the high production case, almost half of the cobalt supply in 2040 is refined from laterite ore from today’s level of less than 30%. Cobalt mining has traditionally been supported by hydropower in the DRC, which led to relatively lower emissions intensity associated with production. However, a combination of more energy intensive operations in the DRC and the rise of Indonesia means that the average emissions intensity associated with cobalt production is set to rise substantially as production grows. This makes a strong case for strengthened regulatory and industry efforts to reduce emissions from cobalt production operations. High concentration of cobalt mining in a single country owned and operated by foreign mining entities has shown the challenge of maintaining a secure supply. As exemplified by the recent disputes between the DRC government and foreign miners, the state’s endeavour to gain more control over its mines is forming into royalty disputes and sanctions on some of the largest mines in the world. Notably, the DRC state owned Gécamines had suspended China based CMOC’s TFM, the world’s second largest cobalt mine, in July 2022 after an escalation in royalty dispute. CMOC holds an 80% stake in the TFM copper cobalt ore project and Gécamines holds 20%. The mine resumed export in April 2023 after CMOC struck a USD 2 billion deal , a USD 800 million settlement between 2023 and 2028 and at least USD 1,2 billion in dividends. More recently in April this year, the DRC suspended nine subcontractors working at mines run by the Kazakhstan backed Eurasian Resources Group alleging that the firms are not controlled by Congolese nationals as required by law. The sanction affects companies’ operations under contracts, including Metalkol, the fourth largest cobalt supply source in 2023. Risks of potential supply disruptions from the world's largest cobalt supplying nation persist, amid an ongoing tug of war between the DRC administration and foreign miners over ownership stakes in the region's vast copper and cobalt resources. Logistic constraints: Rocky roads from mines to ports There are also risks associated with logistics due to the fragile transportation infrastructure connecting the copper cobalt mines in Central Africa located far inland to the nearest ports, the export corridors that would ship raw minerals overseas for refining. A large portion of DRC production currently relies on trucks to be transported over long distances by road, passing through several borders. Trucks would generally transport minerals from the so called copper belt to Indian Ocean ports such as Beira in Mozambique, Dar es Salaam in Tanzania or Durban in South Africa, which take 17, 20 and 25 days, respectively. The road networks are inconsistent with large sections in need of significant maintenance and improvement. In rainy seasons, many roads become inoperable. Truck deliveries have raised concerns for being more costly, slow and unreliable compared with railways. In October 2023, thousands of truckers in the DRC went on strike demanding logistics firms to pay an extra risk allowance of USD 700 per journey. The strike blocked exports of copper and cobalt produced by some of the biggest producers including CMOC’s Tenke Fungurume, Glencore’s Kamoto, Ivanhoe Mines’ Kamoa Kakula, and Sicomines’ Mashamba West until coming to an end in November. These events related to logistics underscore that the possibility of short term supply disruptions cannot be ruled out, even though overall supply and demand balances may appear stable. As logistical issues disrupt secure upstream supply, railway transportation via the Lobito Corridor has gained momentum in recent years. The corridor is an agreement to construct railways and supporting infrastructure to connect mines in Central Africa to the Angolan port city of Lobito. The United States and Europe recently announced significant financing plans for the Lobito Corridor to enhance material shipments via the Atlantic Ocean. In July 2023, the Lobito Atlantic Railway company secured a 30 year concession to provide railway services, contingent on investing USD 100 million in the DRC and USD 455 million in Angola through a public private financing arrangement. In October 2023, the United States, the European Union, the African Development Bank, and the Africa Finance Corporation signed a MoU to co operate on extending the Lobito Corridor, under the shared vision. Initial trial shipments via the Lobito Corridor began in December 2023, loading copper from Kamoa Kakula in Kolwezi and reaching the port of Lobito in just eight days. In February 2024, Canada’s Ivanhoe Mines and Trafigura became the first long term users of the corridor. Meanwhile, China proposed a USD 1 billion project to upgrade the Tazara railway connecting Zambia’s copper belt to the port of Dar es Salaam in Tanzania. While the extent of the refurbishment plan remains unclear, the revitalisation of railways connecting Central Africa to both the Atlantic and Indian Oceans would help address some of the major logistical issues the region has long suffered from. Graphite, a form of carbon commonly known for its use in pencil cores, traditionally serves various technical applications: as a lubricant, an electrical conductor, a refractory material or simply as a source of raw carbon. Historically, the metallurgical industry has been the primary consumer of graphite, employing it in crucibles, as an input for steelmaking and as electrodes in electric arc furnaces. However, the battery industry is rapidly emerging as the leading consumer of graphite, with projections indicating it may account for over half of total demand by the late 2020s. Graphite’s expanding role in battery anodes contributes to a robust short term growth outlook, with global demand projected to double by 2030 in the STEPS. By 2040, total graphite demand reaches 13 Mt in this scenario. Meeting announced climate pledges in the APS pushes up demand further close to 16 Mt by 2040 and to 18 Mt in the NZE Scenario, a fourfold increase from today’s levels. The EV industry emerges as a primary consumer of graphite. In the APS, this sector consumes 5,4 Mt in 2030, higher than current global production levels, representing 60% of total demand. Battery storage is also a significant contributor to demand growth. When considering other battery applications, such as those in electronics, the demand for graphite related to batteries , requiring specific grades and dedicated supply chains , is expected to account for 65% of total demand by 2040, compared with the 33% today. In EV batteries, while silicon is increasingly being doped in graphite anodes, it is unlikely to challenge graphite’s dominant position in the short term. However, we expect a continued shift towards higher silicon contents over time. This trend, coupled with the adoption of alternative anode chemistries such as lithium metal anodes, high silicon anodes  and hard carbon , gradually affects the pace of graphite demand growth in the longer term, leading to a moderate reduction in graphite demand in batteries post 2040. However, the speed of deployment of these alternative chemistries depends on overcoming significant technical and scaling challenges, such as ensuring high cycle life and resisting volume changes. In both the APS and NZE Scenario, there is a notable shift towards the increased use of electric arc furnaces over traditional blast furnaces, especially in Europe, aiming to decrease emissions associated with steel production. This increases demand for graphite electrodes, primarily based on synthetic graphite. By 2040, graphite demand for metallurgical applications reaches 3,4 Mt in the APS and 3,8 Mt in the NZE Scenario, up from 1,5 Mt today. Graphite is found and extracted from natural geological deposits in various forms . However, since the turn of the 20th century and the discovery of the Acheson process, the mineral can also be synthesised from fossil fuel based products, such as petroleum coke, with an emissions intensive process. Most battery producers globally are heavily reliant on China for graphite anodes. While sizeable natural graphite anode capacities exist outside of China, they depend almost entirely on refined graphite supply from China and exhibit low utilisation rates. Currently, natural graphite mining is dominated by China, accounting for 80% of global production. In the base case, mined natural graphite reaches 2,7 Mt in 2030 and 3 Mt by 2040. The share of China declines to 70% in 2030 due to the growth of two emerging producers: Mozambique, notably with the Ancuabe project , and Madagascar, with the Molo project . Additionally, new players are emerging in Canada, India, Australia and Tanzania , aiming to cater to the growing battery market. Not all forms of natural graphite are suitable for entry into the battery supply chain. Manufacturers use natural flakes, from medium and fine grades, and their availability emerges as a key limiting factor in scaling up battery grade anodes based on natural graphite. The production of natural battery anodes involves multiple steps, including spheronisation, a process of reshaping the graphite flakes, involving over 50% material losses. In the base case, the need for natural graphite anode supply reaches 750 kt by 2030, and this requires close to 1 700 kt of fine and medium grade flakes. Of the total 2 700 kt of graphite mined in 2030, about 70% is likely to be suitable grades. This brings the battery grade flake market slightly above equilibrium, limiting the potential for additional natural graphite supply to the battery anode market. Additional mining capacities are required to meet the necessary volumes of natural graphite anodes post 2030 in climate driven scenarios. While some progress has been achieved in diversifying the mining of natural graphite, the production of spherical graphite, a refined form of natural graphite, remains highly concentrated. Currently, China accounts for 99% of the global market for spherical graphite. Although some downstream operations, such as coating and purification, are occasionally conducted overseas, industrial players in these processes become highly dependent on China for their feedstock supplies. The industry is developing new projects in geographically diverse areas, with a growing number of integrated projects. These include Northern Graphite  and Nouveau Monde  in Canada, Syrah resources  in the United States and several projects in Europe, such as Talga resources of Sweden . If these projects come online as planned, the share of China in spherical graphite supply is set to fall to 85% in 2030 and 80% in 2040 in the base case. Due to constraints on natural graphite supply, synthetic graphite production is increasing its share in batteries although its production is also dominated by a single player, China. Synthetic graphite has been largely used for other applications, notably electrodes, which required lower quality products. However, in recent years, battery related synthetic graphite production has surged from zero to 40% of total synthetic graphite supply, rising to 55% by 2040. Synthetic graphite became a dominant input for battery anodes, commanding an 80% market share. Synthesis of graphite requires the supply of needle coke, a co product from the oil and coal industries. There are surplus capacities to produce needle coke today, mostly in China, meaning that the supply of needle coke is unlikely to be a limiting factor for synthetic graphite supply in the near term, but this may change in the long term in climate driven scenarios. In the base case, the anticipated supply of battery grade spherical graphite and synthetic graphite is projected to be adequate to meet near term demand. However, sustaining the long term demand trajectory will require additional production volumes. The supply of battery grade natural flake graphite may turn to deficits over the next decade. However, it should be noted that there is a substantial number of announced synthetic anode projects, primarily in China, exceeding the scale required in the NZE Scenario. Many of these projects are likely to experience low utilisation rates or may not come to fruition. However, this implies that any short supply of battery grade natural graphite could result in a further increase in the share of synthetic graphite to offset the deficit. However this comes at a cost. The extraction and conversion of synthetic graphite involves significantly higher greenhouse gas emissions compared with its natural equivalent, as it involves an electricity intensive process relying on fossil resources. Although less energy intensive graphite synthesis projects and techniques exist, such as lengthwise graphitisation, a higher proportion of synthetic graphite in anodes is expected to result in significantly greater GHG emissions during battery production. Nonetheless, some projects developed in areas with low emissions power generation sources claim to achieve significant reductions in emissions compared with current supply chains. Moreover, China currently accounts for the vast majority of existing and planned synthetic graphite production capacity. Therefore, a further increase in the share of synthetic graphite in batteries would reinforce China's dominance in this sector. Following germanium, gallium and rare earth elements related technologies, graphite is now subject to a system of export licences from China since December 2023. These controls specifically focus on graphite for battery grades , considered “highly sensitive”, and exclude lower quality grades, such as electrodes for metallurgical applications. These controls can have numerous ripple effects. The announcement has placed pressure on anode producers overseas to stockpile significant volumes. As implementation commenced in January 2024, export volumes to key anode producers in Japan and Korea plummeted well below previous monthly averages before returning to normal levels in March. Customers can apply for licences with a six month validity, a process that requires disclosure of the end user, creating significant rigidity in trade and discouraging risk averse investors from expanding downstream capacities. Currently, 45% of EV and storage batteries are sold and installed outside of China, translating into 350 kt of graphite content in their anodes. By 2030, this implied demand outside of China is set to reach 2,2 Mt in the APS and 3,5 Mt in the NZE Scenario. When the 35% threshold for the share of a single supplier, targeted in the EU Critical Raw Materials Act, is applied, this means that 1,3 Mt needs to come from regions outside of China. In the base case, the expected supply outside of China falls significantly short of these material requirements. While additional projects in the early stage, not included in the base case, could narrow the gap somewhat — such as those in the United States, Korea, Saudi Arabia, India, Norway and Finland — the anticipated supply may still not be sufficient to meet the requirements. This indicates that achieving the diversification ambitions outlined in recent policy measures would be highly challenging without significant efforts to expedite the development of projects in geographically diverse regions. These projects would, however, need to move ahead amid strong competition from incumbent players and significant announced overcapacities in China, which may require strategic and co ordinated support from governments. Rare earth elements  are a set of 17 nearly indistinguishable silvery white soft metals. Several of these are often found together in many known deposits. Though relatively plentiful in the entire Earth’s crust, they have garnered the label “rare” because of how unusual it is to find them in a pure form. Rare earth elements are usually classified into light rare earths  such as lanthanum, cerium, praseodymium, neodymium, samarium and europium and heavy rare earths  such as gadolinium, terbium, dysprosium, holmium, erbium, thulium, ytterbium, lutetium, scandium and yttrium. Light rare earths are often used in water purifiers  and hydrogen absorbers  and as stabilisers in catalytic compounds . Heavy rare earths are used to produce more energy efficient phosphors for the displays of computers and phones as well as fluorescent lamps  and in fibre optic cables and repeaters . Neodymium and dysprosium can handle a greater saturation magnetisation than more common magnetic elements such as iron, which allows for fabrication of stronger and smaller magnets. Combined with other elements, these magnets  are among the strongest magnets in the industry, able to withstand temperatures as high as 230⁰ C. This section presents analysis and insights largely focusing on the four rare earth elements that are commonly used to manufacture modern permanent magnets: neodymium  and praseodymium  are the primary elements, while dysprosium  and terbium  are commonly used as additives to enhance the performance of Nd Pr based magnets. Magnets made with these elements play a very important role in clean energy transitions as they are used in automotive traction motors for EVs as well as in wind turbine motors. Electric motors and generators driven by rare earth permanent magnets represent the most energy efficient devices developed so far, making energy savings of about 20 40% compared with ordinary motors. Moreover, the addition of small quantities  of these magnet rare earth elements in a motor can dramatically reduce  the requirements for other critical minerals needed for an EV. The global demand for magnet REE nearly doubled between 2015 and 2023 to reach 93 kt, while the share of clean energy technologies, driven by new EV sales and wind turbine deployments to meet climate ambitions, has expanded from just 8% to nearly 18% during the same period. In the APS, we see total magnet REE demand reaching 131 kt by 2030 and further to 181 kt by 2050, with the share of demand from EV motors rising most sharply from 7% in 2023 to nearly 30% in 2050. The NZE Scenario sees a slightly accelerated ramp up of EV sales and wind turbine deployment between today and 2030 compared with the APS, driving the total demand in this year to be 15 kt higher than in the APS. The production of rare earth elements is perhaps among the least geographically diversified of all key energy transition minerals. Their high level of geographical concentration is comparable to those of cobalt and natural graphite for mining at the same time rare earth elements rank as the most concentrated in terms of global refining capacity. The share of the top three producers for mining of magnet REEs in 2023 stood at 85%, of which China alone accounted for 62% of global mined production. When looking at refining, the top three countries controlled the lion’s share of the refined output in 2023, with China’s dominance being even more pronounced than in mining as it single handedly represented 92% of the global refined output. The expected supply of magnet REE from operating and announced mining projects rises by 44% and 52% respectively from today’s levels to surpass 107 kt in 2030 and reach 114 kt in 2040. The dominance of the top three countries in global mined supply reduces slightly, falling to around 81% of the total compared with 85% today. The expected refined supply from operating and announced projects rises similarly to 106 kt in 2030 and over 110 kt in 2040, with the share of top three refining countries remaining extremely high, falling marginally from 98% to 92% today. By 2030, China’s share of global refined output falls to 77%. The type of ores that the four magnet REE often come from is heavy sands , which also contain radioactive elements such as uranium and thorium, making their extraction quite challenging. Outside of China, very few countries have the infrastructure and the willingness to build solutions for the storage of these radioactive by products. Processing a kilogramme of rare earth oxides can produce close to 1 kilobecquerel of uranium 235  equivalent of radioactive elements. Proper storage is the only way to prevent this material from entering the environment through waste streams, but studies show that only 17% of operating rare earth miners align with the Global Industry Standard on Tailings Management . Appropriate waste management performance will be vital to scaling rare earths supply chains in geographically diverse regions. In the upstream segment, only a handful of mines are operating at scale outside China and Myanmar , and some mines are producing the rare earths as a by product of manganese or titanium production. In general, newly announced projects have a lead time of eight years on average, making the scaling up of mined production beyond China a challenging proposition. The refining segment of the supply chain outside China is even more nascent than mining, with only a couple of operating industrial scale facilities existing in Malaysia and Estonia, some facilities in Australia nearing operation, and some smaller scale refining units nearing operation in France and the United States. On mining, a vast majority of total mined REE production as of 2024 comes from China, notably from the Bayan Obo mines in Inner Mongolia. In the rest of the world, Mount Weld in Australia and Mountain Pass in the United States are leading producers. The two fastest growing regions in terms of mined production of magnet REE between 2015 and today have been Myanmar, which grew its share in global production from just 0,2% to 14%, and the United States whose share grew from 1% to 9% in the same period. In the period to 2030, China remains the top mining country for magnet REE supply, but Australia increases its share in the global total to 18% and the United States maintains its share similar to today’s levels at 7%. Most REE mining operations in Myanmar occur close to the Pang War Tengchong border crossing with China in Kachin State, which is largely controlled by the Kachin Independence Organisation . As a result of the proximity of these critical resources to China, the vast majority is transported over the border for further processing and refining. While most tin concentrate sourced from Myanmar is processed in Yunnan Province, China, it should be noted that REEs sourced from Myanmar are far more difficult to trace. This is a result of the multiple REE processing facilities throughout China that often combine raw materials from diverse sources. The resilience of all global supply chains was tested during the pandemic. During this period, the trade of both tin and REEs from Myanmar to China was negatively impacted by major border port closures, notably at the Menglian, Diantan and Menglong ports, resulting from China’s zero Covid policy, exposing the existing fragility of this supply network. In April 2023, the KIO announced the suspension of REE mining in Kachin state from 4 September 2023, as protests highlighted environmental damage from mining and processing. Despite this, Chinese companies were permitted to gradually halt production in line with necessary steps rather than coming to an abrupt halt. Pressure has been building to comprehensively monitor mining operations in the region following environmental concerns, with the local government announcing inspections of REE mining operations in September 2023 that were expected to last only ten days, equating to one to three weeks of supply. However, after random inspections across more than 300 mining sites, the extended suspension has led to the temporary dismissal of local workers and uncertainty surrounding the resumption of operations as no new notices have been released by authorities. Chinese imports of REE material spiked significantly in August 2023, increasing by approximately 76% year on year, according to Chinese trade data, prior to the implementation of the suspension. Stockpiling of REE material ahead of peak consumption was further driven by environmental inspections that took place in late August in Jiangxi province, a major REE production hub. In early 2022, REE manufacturers in Ganzhou, Jiangxi province, suffered production capacity reductions of at least 25% after border gates between Myanmar and China were shut down at the beginning of the year, illustrating the significance of the current suspension. While reserves should be sufficient for up to three to six months, any extended suspension of REE mining in Kachin state could be damaging for refineries in China reliant upon feedstock from Myanmar. The government guided price for REEs in China has remained relatively low to incentivise downstream production, as magnet producers have found it increasingly difficult to pass additional costs to downstream end users, though this has caused poor financial performance for upstream operators. On refining, Chinese dominance in 2023 remained unchallenged. In the rest of the world, refineries owned by Lynas in Malaysia, Viet Nam Rare Earth JSC  in Viet Nam and Neo Performance Materials in Estonia  are the few notable industrial scale producers. The fastest growing region in terms of refined production of magnet REE between today and 2030 is Malaysia, raising its share in global refined output from 5% to 12%. While the overall picture for regional distribution of expected refined supply does not change much to 2030, there is an additional 29 kt of refined output between 2023 to 2030 in the base case and 31 kt in the high production case. The majority of additions to 2030 in the base case come from China, Malaysia, the United States and Australia. In the high production case, the emergence of France and Norway as refiners in Europe reduces China’s contribution to the total additions to 2030 by 3 percentage points. Lynas’ operation in Malaysia from 2012 made it the first REE refining plant outside China. After years without steady supply of REEs, Japan started sourcing the materials from Malaysia since 2013 , which has enabled Japan to recover and increase their manufacturing activities since then. Currently, Lynas produces rare earth oxides, carbonates, oxalates and chlorides in Gebeng, Pahang, with a total capacity of 22 000 tonnes per year. Recognising the potential of the downstream industry of magnet manufacturing as well as the advantages of having rare earth oxides  production as raw materials in the country, the Malaysian government, through the Malaysian Investment Development Authority , has been promoting the production of advanced materials including rare earth magnets under the Promotion of Investment Act  1986. To continuously support this, MIDA announced that it will continue its collaborations with the relevant stakeholders to attract potential investors to develop the industry. The support will focus on downstream manufacturing activities, as well as integrated projects including rare earth metals manufacturing that can convert oxides into metals. For the four magnet rare earths mentioned above, the supply from today’s operating projects is sufficient to meet current demand, and this is broadly likely to be the case in 2025. Between 2025 and 2040, the majority of the supply increases come from operating mines, particularly Bayan Obo in China and Mount Weld in Australia, increasing their expected production . The primary supply requirements  in the STEPS grow in line with the projected brownfield and greenfield expansion and can be satisfied if additions occur as planned. However, after 2025, for the NZE Scenario and 2035 for the APS, a gap emerges between projected primary supply requirements and supply additions. In the NZE Scenario, there is an implied supply gap of 5 kt in 2030 and 14 kt in 2040. The major concern for magnet REE, however, is not a huge gap between demand and supply like in the case of copper or lithium, but rather an extremely important level of geographical concentration of today’s as well as future mining and refining projects that expose this market significantly to supply disruptions. Primary supply requirements in the medium to long term are also a function of growing interest in recycling manufacturing scrap and end of life magnets that will generate secondary supplies. In 2030, around 35 kt and 40 kt of total magnet REE demand may be met using secondary supplies respectively in the APS and the NZE Scenario. Between 2030 and 2050, the secondary supply expands 1,7 fold in each scenario, to 60 kt and 67 kt respectively. Recycling so far has focused on the traditional “long loop” recycling, which involves breaking down each element using various techniques to recover them as rare earth oxides that then have to be converted into metals before being cast into alloys and broken down into a fine alloy powder to make the magnets. It is an important but energy intensive and expensive process. New technologies such as those of HyProMag, a UK based company with its recycling facility in Birmingham, and MagREEsource, a French start up that secured Euro 5 million to open its pilot site in Grenoble, have recently been in the news for their patented Hydrogen Processing of Magnet Scrap  technique, which uses hydrogen as a processing gas to separate magnets from waste streams as a magnet alloy powder, which can be directly compactified into sintered rare earth magnets. This “short loop” process does not require heat and is relatively quick, and magnets made with these recycled elements have been shown to have significantly lower enviromental footprint  than those produced in China from mined minerals. Other companies using innovative recycling technologies, such as ReElement Technologies in the United States and Ionic Technologies in Northern Ireland, receiving support from major companies provides further positive signals for increasing contributions from secondary supplies. Two major rare earths producers outside China, Australia based Lynas Rare Earths Limited and US based MP Materials Corp., are clamping down on costs to offset a sharp drop in prices and weak Chinese demand. Lynas’ average selling price for neodymium praseodymium  fell by 32% per kilogramme year on year between July and December 2023, while MP Materials witnessed a 34% price dip to USD 5 622 per metric tonne of rare earth oxide concentrate year on year for the December 2023 quarter. This low price environment in recent months, in part caused by China producing in excess of demand, has created some tensions in the market, but many experts believe that long term demand beyond 2025 will remain robust. Industry expectations are that export credit agencies will continue to support rare earth developers outside China, despite the challenging price environment at the moment. Moreover, China will continue to be a strong driver of rare earths demand, as evidenced by China's BYD Company Ltd. overtaking Tesla Inc. as the top selling EV maker in 2023. Under these circumstances, China may prioritise supply for the domestic market, leaving a deficit globally. Since the last major global discussion about potential disruptions in rare earth elements supply in 2011, almost no new large scale facilities have come online. The feasibility of announced projects for these minerals has been very low outside China. Efforts for diversification can be seen from different parts of the world. In September 2023, the Malaysian government stated that it is considering a ban on unprocessed rare earth concentrate in order to boost domestic REE processing. In March 2024, it was further mentioned that the Malay National Mineral Council would assess a proposal to create a government linked company for rare earth extraction. In the United States, USA Rare Earth  signed an offtake agreement with ReElement Technologies in March 2024 for supply of rare earth oxides to its magnet manufacturing facility in Oklahoma from 2025, with the goal of expanding to 900 tonnes per year by 2028. Additionally, the US Export Import Bank sent letters of interest in March 2024 to provide up to USD 600 million in debt funding to rare earth developers Meteoric Resources and Australian Strategic Minerals. Meteoric Resources is developing the Caldeira project in Brazil targeting ionic adsorption clays, while Australian Strategic Minerals is developing the Dubbo project in Australia and downstream metallisation capabilities in Korea. This announcement from the United States follows a series of government backed investment in rare earth projects, with the US Department of Defense providing additional funding to Lynas Rare Earths for its Texas based refinery, and the Australian government providing financial support to Hastings Technology Metals, Iluka Resources and Arafura Resources to continue development of their respective rare earth mines and processing facilities. There are two broad classifications of magnets made from REE: bonded magnets  and sintered magnets . Besides China, only two facilities in Japan are known to produce the latter at industrial scale. New project announcements from Neo Perfomance Materials in Estonia approved by the European Commission and some from the Korean company Star Group funded by POSCO could come online within the next years. Roughly, three quarters of the unit cost of making permanent magnets is attributed to the raw materials and about 10% to energy costs, and the rest is labour costs. Labour costs  are comparable to China in Europe and North America however, energy costs are significantly lower in China. Today, original equipment manufacturers  are hesitant to pay the 30% premium , equivalent to around USD 30 to USD 50 per vehicle , that comes from energy costs and trade taxes for magnets made outside China, creating the biggest challenge for diversification of the industry in the rest of the world. There is a constant development of new rare earth processing technologies by various industry participants globally, though many of these processes have struggled to make significant advances. This is not always the fault of the technology developer, however, with difficulties in acquiring necessary feedstock at commercially viable prices, as is the case for REEtec in Norway, also causing delays and setback at processors. Will ionic adsorption clay deposits change the game? Ionic adsorption clay  is also known as regolith hosted ionic adsorption deposits , which contain rare earth elements adsorbed physically to the clay minerals surface, mainly kaolinite and halloysite. Weathering of igneous rock, primarily granite, that contains specific rare earth bearing minerals results in the formation of IAC. The best environments for this process to occur are warm, humid and slightly acidic conditions in subtropical regions. Important source rocks typically have a relatively high background in rare earths and rare earth bearing minerals in these rocks will include monazite, xenotime, bastnaesite, allanite, titanite and apatite. The hype surrounding this form of deposit comes from the hope that extracting rare earths that are loosely bonded to the surface of rocks is relatively simpler, less energy intensive and cheaper than obtaining them from the depths of hard rock formations, and could also avoid the radioactive by products that accompany the traditional mining processes for these minerals. Ore deposits containing physically adsorbed lanthanides are substantially lower grade than other rare earth deposit types  however, the low mining and processing costs make them economically attractive as sources of rare earths. Global resources of HREE are dominantly sourced from Chinese regolith hosted IADs or clay deposits in Myanmar and Laos, in which the elements are inferred to be weakly adsorbed onto clay minerals. Similar deposits elsewhere might provide alternative supply for these high tech metals, but the adsorption mechanisms remain unclear. Traditional REE projects based on hard rock developments are extremely capital intensive and can cost USD 1 billion to USD 2 billion to build, for which most junior miners cannot secure funding. In recent years, focus in the junior miner space has shifted from highly capital intensive hard rock REE projects to low capital intensity IAC projects which are enriched in HREE. Despite in situ grades being lower than most hard rock projects, the mining is easier, leading to substantially lower capital expenditure and operating costs. Most clay operations involve digging or scraping of only the top twenty metres or so of earth, as opposed to blasting hard rock sources which may extend down to hundreds of metres or more. Clay material is soft and requires only breaking up, whereas hard rock material needs to be crushed and ground, often in large quantities. Then there is the processing. Large scale high temperature roasting and acid leaching for hard rock projects, compared with heap or vat leaching at atmospheric temperature and pressure for ionic clay projects. Last but not least, clay waste material is generally inert and can be backfilled into the mining area, meaning there is no need for tailings dams or dry stacking. In regolith deposits, Chinese miners found that weakly acidic ammonium sulphate or sodium chloride solution readily reclaims the rare earths from the ionic bonded clays, allowing the resulting crude solution to be chemically treated to eliminate contaminants for further solvent extraction separation and refining. This processing can be in situ leaching heap leaching or in tank leaching with increasing cost and all with significant environmental impact. Generally, Chinese costs for REE reclamation from IAC deposits are low and despite the low recoveries peaking at around 30% to 40% in final products, these projects appear to be economic. The economic viability of IAC deposits remains uncertain, but they look increasingly attractive from perspectives of capital intensity, ease of working, carbon intensity and radioactive waste management. While China appears to have developed a low cost method of reclaiming rare earths from IAC deposits, not all REE clay projects are IAC projects and it is important for prospective investors to have sufficient metallurgical testing carried out to establish the ionic adsorption capacity and suitability for ion exchange within all new clay discoveries. There has been a steady flow of announcements of IAC discoveries outside southern China and Myanmar in recent years, such as in Australia, Brazil and Uganda. How quickly these discoveries can be converted to projects operating at scale remains to be seen. In March 2024, Appia Rare Earths & Uranium announced a maiden mineral resource estimate for its ionic adsorption clay PCH project in Goiás, Brazil. In addition to the growth in IAC type production, the most significant change in the rare earth space would be the growth of supply from heavy mineral sand  operations, which are expected to contribute volumes of not only Nd Pr feedstocks but also provide notable quantities of Dy Tb to downstream processors. While some HMS producers are looking to integrate production, as is the case with Iluka, Energy Fuels and Tronox, many producers will continue to supply material into the Chinese market. On the technology innovation side, the development of alternative magnet technologies such as iron nitride has been a key topic of interest for many stakeholders wanting to understand the potential impact on neodymium iron boron  magnets used in automotive applications. Niron Magnetics’ Clean Earth Magnet has attracted interest from General Motors in the United States, with whom Niron has partnered for the development of EV drivetrains, starting with a demonstrator for the Chevrolet Bolt. Further funding for Niron has also come from Samsung and Stellantis. One apparent disadvantage of iron nitride magnets is that their coercivity is less than that of neodymium. Coercivity is a measure of the magnet’s ability to resist having the polarity of its field reversed when exposed to a strong opposing field. Without coercivity, the magnetic fields in a motor would rotate without turning the shaft. Initial assessments indicate that iron nitride will struggle to compete with incumbent neodymium iron boron magnets for automotive drivetrains as the importance of high magnetic density, high coercivity and field strength which the latter technologies bring are non negotiable for compact motor and EV manufacturers. Aluminium traded within a fairly narrow range of USD 2 100 to USD 2 450 per tonne over the past year, with the strong dollar and slowing industrial activity setting a ceiling on prices. This trend is likely to continue in the near term owing to the persistent slowdown in manufacturing as well as supply side uncertainty. In the long term, global demand growth is expected to narrow the surplus, driven in large part by increasing utilisation in clean energy applications. Aluminium’s use as a lightweight structural element in solar PV installations and EVs is expected to remain as a primary demand driver. In addition, transmission requirements arising from increased electricity demand and renewable penetration are expected to boost the use of aluminium conductor steel reinforced cables. Demand growth from traditional demand sectors in construction and manufacturing are likely to remain modest. On the supply side, drought risks in the southwestern Chinese province of Yunnan pose significant near term potential for supply volatility and elevated prices. Hydro powered Yunnan accounts for about 12% of Chinese aluminium production, but low water levels have resulted in production cuts totalling more than 1 Mt per annum between November 2023 and February 2024. The proportion of Russian metal within LME stocks has doubled from 45% in February 2023 to over 90% in 2024 amid low overall stock levels. The LME’s April 2024 ban on accepting Russian aluminium, copper and nickel created opportunities for traders, which further dried up the liquidity for tradeable metal. Global production levels are expected to be able to serve near term demand increases. Despite slowing growth in China as primary production capacity reaches the government mandated limit of 45 Mt per year, secondary production growth as well as new smelting capacity are expected to support long term market growth. Manganese demand is primarily driven by steel, as it is a key component of steel alloys. Currently, batteries account for a small share of total manganese demand however, this share is set to increase rapidly due to the surging deployment of EVs. Manganese is a critical component of one of the dominant EV cathode chemistries, NMC, as well as now being utilised in the new variant of the current leading chemistry LFP known as LMFP, where LMFP is set to start taking market share. For instance, CATL’s LMFP cells have been confirmed for use in six models in China and are undergoing validation by Tesla, who are expected to use the cells in the Model 3 made in China. The addition of manganese increases energy density compared with traditional LFP. Other chemistries under development such as lithium nickel manganese oxide  also use higher fractions of manganese compared with conventional nickel rich cathodes. Therefore, this shift towards greater manganese contents in cathode chemistry is expected to drive a surge in demand. Manganese is also a key metal used in wind turbines as a critical part of steel components. By 2030 manganese demand from clean energy technologies increases almost threefold in the STEPS, over threefold in the APS and almost fivefold in the NZE Scenario. By 2050 manganese demand from clean energy technologies is a remarkable 11 times higher than today in the STEPS, 16 times higher in the APS and 17 times higher in the NZE Scenario. The rapid growth in EV deployment is responsible for the exceptional increase in manganese demand in clean energy technologies. This results in the share of demand from clean energy technologies increasing from 1% today to 15% in 2050 in the APS and 17% in 2050 in the NZE Scenario. Thus, steel remains the dominant driver of total manganese demand. However, it is critical to note all of this remarkable growth in manganese demand from EV batteries will need to be high purity manganese sulphate. In terms of supply, mined manganese production is highly concentrated with the top three countries producing three quarters of global supply. South Africa is the world's largest producer with 35% of production, followed by Gabon with a quarter and Australia with 15%. This concentration already poses significant risks. Exports of manganese ore from Gabon dropped by 13% from 2022 to 2023 due to the military coup and a landslide on key rail infrastructure which required significant maintenance. This increased political instability and risk deters investment and causes concern for future supply disruptions for the key supply region. Gabon also has the highest grade  compared with the other two leading producers Australia  and South Africa , thus its critical importance for global manganese supply. Australia’s GEMCO mine is the world’s second largest manganese mine but it has suspended exports due to infrastructure damage from Tropical Cylone Megan in March. Operations and export sales will remain suspended until early 2025. Exports from South Africa also dropped by 7% following extreme weather, maintenance challenges and insufficient investment for key rail infrastructure transporting manganese ore. Nevertheless, there is potential for diversification, seen by comparing current production with reserves . In terms of reserves, South Africa is indeed the largest with almost 20%, followed by Australia with 15% of the global total. China and Brazil hold significant reserves with 15% together. There are several qualifications which must also be taken into account when assessing reserves including the resource quality or any above ground constraints limiting potential. Also, critically, there is a need for updated geological surveys in emerging and developing economies, where the current surveys are out of date. However, the critical risk for manganese is the supply of high purity manganese sulphates required for battery chemistries, a crucial issue given the remarkable growth from EV battery demand. While manganese is abundant, only around 1% of global supply is suitable for batteries. China dominates supply of battery grade manganese sulphate, producing 97% of global supply. There are only two other refineries outside China in operation, in Japan and Belgium, though with several projects in development including in Canada, South Africa, Australia and the United States. With manganese sulphate prices relatively low due to slight surpluses from China, it is difficult for many other regions to compete with China on costs. This is proving challenging for new ventures to be competitive and secure investment. Some analysts even forecast a deficit in supply of battery grade manganese sulphate as early as 2027, adding concern for ensuring sufficient supply for EV batteries. Nevertheless, the total dominance of China in the supply of high purity manganese sulphates today is a major risk alone, making supply highly vulnerable to suddent changes in policy, geopolitics or supply shocks. The silicon market is poised to be affected by two waves of demand growth from clean energy technologies. A first phase is related to the ramp up of solar PV deployment, requiring close to 1,5 Mt in 2030 in the APS, and close to 2 Mt to meet the needs in the NZE Scenario. A second phase corresponds to the growing use of silicon in the battery industry, as a higher performance substitute for graphite, with related demand reaching over 1 Mt in 2050 in the APS and the NZE Scenario. Silicon is produced in its metallic and crystalline forms using silica rich minerals, generally from high purity quartzite. The existing silicon industry is already mature, supplied by an abundant resource, with a current global production already close to 3,8 Mt, but new demand trends related to clean energy  are transforming the supply chain, requiring larger volumes of higher purity products. Consumption was historically dominated by the aluminium alloy industry and silicone producers , calling for “metallurgical grade” of 99,99%  purity silicon. Solar PV is known for requiring 99,9999%  while electronic applications can require even higher purity, ranging up to 11N. Both electronic and solar PV uses may increase demand for high purity products. Technological gains in efficiency are significantly reducing pressures on silicon resources, with requirements in solar panels declining from 6,8 g/W in 2010 to 2,3 g/W in 2022 and close to 1,5 g/W in the latest generation of solar PV technologies. For EV batteries, manufacturers are already adding small volumes of silicon in anodes, but further increasing this share faces significant technological hurdles, such as swelling during the charging cycle. Several start ups are developing various silicon nanoproducts to reduce these effects, suggesting potential for new specialised silicon supply chains. For stationary storage, silicon uses are expected to remain small, due to lower energy density requirements. Similar to other minerals, the silicon refining industry has demonstrated the capacity to adapt to the rapid growth in demand, albeit at the expense of increasing concentration and significant price volatility. The supply was initially affected by a glut that began in 2015, followed by a period of supply tightness in 2021. Currently, there is an oversupply situation, with a high volume of capacities developed in China in line with its downstream solar PV capacities. Silicon prices fell by 74% in 2023 to around USD 8 per kilogramme. China’s share of solar grade silicon grew from 27% in 2010 to over 80% today. The current price context and local energy prices are adding pressure on European solar grade polysilicon manufacturers, with some capacities closing down. US restrictions on solar PV imports related to concerns of forced labour have increased demand for supplies outside of China, with some plants being developed in the United States recently. Recycling silicon remains challenging due to weak economic incentives, driven by the low cost of the material input and the prevailing low price environment affecting the 6N refined silicon market. Historically, solar PV recycling players have prioritised base materials present in larger volumes , or precious metals such as silver, rather than silicon. However, some European are developing plants designed to recycle silicon. The success of LFP battery chemistries is creating a market for a new input, iron phosphate, and its precursor , purified phosphoric acid. As LFP cathode production rises, so does demand for this high purity input, reaching over 2 Mt in the APS by 2030 and close to 4 Mt in the NZE Scenario. Further demand growth for high phosphoric acid comes from next generation lithium iron phosphate manganese  chemistries, whose higher performance is likely to further popularise EV batteries containing phosphate. In 2040, demand rises to almost 6 Mt in the APS and over 6,5 Mt in the NZE Scenario. Phosphates are cheaper than the metals they replace from previous battery compositions  and are currently produced in vast quantities for fertiliser applications. About 220 Mt of phosophate rocks are extracted each year, containing about 28 Mt of phosphorus, and enough to produce over 80 Mt of phosphoric acid. Three challenges could arise from these developments: Increased competition with agricultural supply , despite demand in smaller volumes and higher grade requirements, additionnal demand from the energy sector could change supply and demand balances in the fertiliser market. Geological deposits for phosphate rocks are sufficient, but questions remain regarding mining capacities, particularly the best deposits for the production of purified phosphoric acid. This process requires high grade and low rates of heavy metals such as cadmium. Some LFP supply chain investments are oriented towards countries with significant phosphate resources, such as Morocco, which also benefits from a number of favourable free trade agreements. An ability for new players to access supplies already secured by refining. Once concentrated in China, LFP technologies have gained popularity elsewhere including among North American gigafactories. These new players need to find a channel to source materials reliably. Prices for platinum group metals  remained under pressure for the past year, driven in large part by poor automotive sales. The basket price, defined as the average price of the five PGMs  weighted by production, seems unlikely to increase meaningfully in the short term. Although the five PGMs occur together in nature, divergent market outlooks are complicating strategic decision making for these elements. In the near term, prices for platinum, iridium and ruthenium are expected to remain stable, with platinum having modest upside potential. Rhodium and palladium are likely to remain under pressure due to lower demand for internal combustion engine  emissions catalysts, which represents about 90% of demand for rhodium and 80% of demand for palladium. Future increases in platinum demand remain subject to the future of hydrogen fuel cell vehicle sales, along with demand from existing industrial and ICE applications. Palladium and rhodium demand are likely to decline structurally due to the uptake of EVs. In addition, growing secondary supplies are likely to exert further pressure on producers, especially for North American mines mining palladium rich ores. Demand for iridium and ruthenium are likely to increase consistently in the coming years thanks to demand for membrane electrodes, including those used in proton exchange membrane hydrogen electrolysers. This is likely in spite of continued technical research and development to reduce the amount of precious metals per unit product. Price volatility in the iridium market is expected to continue, driven by concerns over long term supply. However, given the relatively small contribution of iridium and ruthenium to the PGM basket, prices for these metals will have to increase significantly to motivate structural increases in supply. On the supply side, near term shocks remain possible thanks to persistent electricity system issues in South Africa and geopolitical concerns impacting Russian palladium supplies from Norilsk. Since the second half of 2023, South African PGM miners including Sibanye Stillwater, Anglo American Platinum and Impala Platinum have announced cost cutting measures to mitigate the impact of low prices. These measures, which include project deferrals and shutting shafts, have not meaningfully boosted prices, which have remained anaemic. If the current price environment continues, further closures might occur, jeopardising long term primary supply for all five metals. Understanding potential risks across the critical mineral supply chain is an essential step to enhance readiness against potential disruptions and devise necessary policy actions. An approach to mineral security may vary depending on each mineral’s market context and risk exposure. Conducting structured risk assessments can assist policymakers in identifying vulnerabilities in the supply chain, devising appropriate security measures, and directing policy efforts to where they are most needed. We have performed “Clean energy transition risk assessments” for the six key energy transition minerals: copper, lithium, nickel, cobalt, graphite, and rare earth elements. These assessments are based on a comprehensive framework that combines both quantitative and qualitative analyses, to understand potential risk areas that could hamper progress towards energy transitions. The framework encompasses four main categories: supply risks, geopolitical risks, barriers to respond to disruptions, and exposure to environmental, social, and governance  and climate risks . The first category  assesses five dimensions. Pace of demand growth compares projected annual average demand growth rates in the Announced Pledges Scenario  between 2023 and 2030 in relation to historical growth rates between 2010 and 2019. Short term market balances assesses the near term balances between expected supply and primary supply requirements. Long term market balances in climate driven scenarios reviews the balances between expected supply and primary supply requirements in 2040 in the APS. Observed price volatility evaluates historical price volatility based on monthly prices between 2011 and 2023. Impact on clean energy cost examines the share of a material in the total cost of end use clean energy technologies to assess how price volatility could affect clean energy deployment. The second category  assesses five dimensions. Geographical concentration of mined supply assesses the expected share of the top three producing countries for mining in 2030 under the base case supply scenario. Geographical concentration of refined supply assesses the expected share of the top three producing countries for refining in 2030 under the base case supply scenario. N 1 supply and demand balances reviews market balances excluding the largest supplier by comparing the N 1 supply and material requirements in 2030 in the APS . Export risks of major suppliers assesses the risks of trade restriction measures by examining the weighted average export restriction risk score of the current production portfolio for both mining and refining, based on the Organisation for Economic Co operation and Development's  inventory of export restrictions on industrial raw materials and announced intentions. Hurdles to develop new projects in diversified regions conducts qualitative assessments of challenges in building supply chains in geographically diverse regions, such as lead time, capital requirements and technological barriers. The third category  assesses four dimensions. Visible stock levels reviews stock levels at major exchanges. While exchange stocks represent only a fraction of the industry's overall stock levels, they offer a valuable indication of an accessible buffer during disruptions. Transparency of pricing schemes conducts a qualitative assessment of market liquidity, transparency of pricing schemes and the availability of financial tools to hedge price risks. Availability of options to moderate demand assesses possible demand side and technology switching options to moderate demand growth in the event of supply tightness. Status of secondary supply assesses the ability of secondary supply to ramp up during market tightness by examining the share of secondary supply in total supply and its potential for growth. The fourth category  assesses five dimensions. Environmental performance of mining reviews the weighted average enviromental performance score of today's mined production, based on selected indicators in Yale’s Environmental Performance Index. Environmental performance of refining reviews the weighted average grid carbon intensity of the regions refining minerals today, considering that refining operations are highly electricity intensive. Social and governance performance assesses the weighted average corruption, human rights and conflict score of today's mined production, based on relevant indicators in the V Dem database. Exposure to water stress assesses the share of mine production located in areas with high and extreme high water stress and arid conditions. Exposure to earthquake risks assesses the share of mine production located in areas with high earthquake risks. The picture that emerges from the analysis in previous chapters is a complex one. It shows some commonalities across the critical minerals examined, notably in the combination of rising demand and high concentrations among suppliers. However, it also highlights the specificities of the outlook in each case, with different sources of strain and opportunities for growth and for substitution. This final chapter reflects on four broad themes that apply, to a greater or lesser extent, to all of the minerals examined. These areas constitute an agenda for future work by policy makers and industry as they seek to ensure reliable and sustainable supplies of critical minerals: Investment in diversified supply. Long term security of supply is typically a question of adequate investment, but in the case of critical minerals it is not only the adequacy of supply that matters but also the diversity. It can be very challenging for new entrants to gain a foothold in markets with well established incumbents. This section looks at the financing options open to governments that are seeking to encourage or de risk investments in diversified sources of supply. Recycling, innovation, and behavioural change. Strategies for critical minerals security sometimes have an imbalanced focus on expanding supply, but measures to temper demand are essential. Recycling creates a valuable secondary source of minerals that relieves the pressure on primary supply technology innovations have proven potential to ease strains on the supply side and behavioural issues and consumer preferences can have strong implications for vehicle and battery sizes, and therefore on mineral requirements. Market transparency. Transparency of pricing and market information brings important benefits to all aspects of the supply chain, but for the moment these aspects remain weak for many critical minerals. This section considers options to improve the quality of information available to market participants, including moves towards market based price discovery. Sustainable and responsible supplies. As production of critical minerals expands, it will be crucial to ensure that projects do not come at the expense of the people involved or result in local environmental damage. This section discusses how the benefits associated with mineral production, such as revenue and jobs, can be felt by producer countries and communities. Large amounts of investment will be required to develop new supply sources to meet the required demand for critical minerals in climate driven scenarios. For mining, we estimate that approximately USD 590 billion is required in new capital investments between now and 2040 in the Announced Pledges Scenario . As the Net Zero Emissions by 2050  Scenario sees faster deployment of clean energy technologies, total capital requirements are about 30% higher at USD 790 billion over the same period . The largest investment among the critical minerals is in copper. Capital requirements to 2040 for copper mining are USD 330 billion in the APS and USD 490 billion in the NZE Scenario. These amounts reflect not only the significant levels of demand, but also escalating capital requirements per tonne of ore caused by declining ore quality. Although all minerals face this challenge, it is more acute in mature and established markets such as copper. Nickel sees the second largest levels of capital spending , followed by lithium . Lower but still significant amounts of investment are also needed for new refining and smelting facilities. Part of these increases in capital investment need to be made in a way that fosters a more diversified array of supply sources in the future. Financing diversified critical mineral supply chains faces numerous challenges, primarily stemming from two underlying factors: high input costs and long term price uncertainty. Supply side cost inflation, driven by rising energy prices and declining resource quality over the past few years, have persisted even as commodity prices have dropped in recent years. Rising interest rates have further elevated capital costs for producers. As a result, margins have been reduced across the board, impacting operations at each stage of the value chain. During periods of weak prices, these factors led some producers across many commodities to reduce or defer spending on mines as well as midstream assets. Increasingly stringent environmental, social and governance  requirements have also influenced project costs in some advanced economies, making these assets less competitive compared with those in countries with lower regulatory standards. Although the volatile, cyclical nature of commodity prices is well understood by market participants, the policy focus on ramping up the supply of critical minerals for the energy transition has been challenged by record price volatilty and persistent supply chain disruptions. Investors and producers have thus been reluctant to commit to large projects without sufficient confidence in the long term business case for new and more diversified assets. The lack of transparent pricing for many minerals contributes to this uncertainty. Although price discovery for metals such as nickel and copper takes place on liquid exchanges, pricing of lithium, cobalt and graphite, among other materials, still relies upon bilateral contracts that are surveyed and reported by price reporting agencies. Uncertainty over capital costs exacerbates the challenges facing project developers. For instance, in recent years, several lithium raw material development projects experienced a more than 50% increase in estimated capital intensity between pre feasibility studies or preliminary economic assessments, and definitive feasibility studies. Diversified refining and processing projects face additional challenges due to their limited pricing power, especially for non integrated assets, relative to powerful incumbents. Positioned between the raw materials and the downstream value chain, projects are exposed to a cost and revenue squeeze and need to navigate the price volatility between raw material prices and downstream component prices. Price hedging has often proved challenging in relatively small and illiquid markets. Many projects being developed in geographically diverse regions have a higher cost profile than those in today’s dominant regions: for example, several coated spherical graphite projects under development in advanced economies have more than twice the capital intensity of those in the People’s Republic of China . Without specific government measures to reinforce the investment case, consumers and investors typically do not assign much value to diversification, so such projects often face major challenges in mobilising the necessary capital. Moreover, many companies that aim to develop new refining and processing projects in diversified regions are small in size with limited track records, making it challenging to mobilise debt financing at affordable rates. Governments can intervene in various ways to help finance more diversified value chains. These interventions can come from four main sources: government departments and policy banks, sovereign wealth funds , development finance institutions , and export credit/insurance agencies . These agencies may engage directly with private sector firms, through state owned or backed enterprises, in a hybrid fashion, or in partnership with foreign counterparts. They have a number of policy options available to them that range from direct debt or equity investments to indirect financial support and de risking measures that boost competitiveness. While there are often significant overlaps in the remits and capabilities of many of these institutions, they are differentiated in their strategic focus, risk tolerance, and the time horizon of their investment decision making, as outlined in the table at the end of this section. The support they provide can be either in the form of capital expenditure  financing, operating expense  support, and/or risk mitigation. The vast majority of financial support mechanisms for the critical minerals sector have focused on large upfront capital expenditures. These include finance for the construction of mines, refineries and processing plants, and factories. These transactions, like those in the private sector, can contribute to various parts of the capital stack , as loans, equity stakes, or grants. In the United States, the Department of Energy Loan Programs Office  has to date authorised more than USD 5 billion in conditional loan commitments for domestic minerals projects. Among these, the USD 2,26 billion conditional loan for Lithium Americas’ Thacker Pass mine is the largest public commitment for a single project. The French government, through the General Secretariat for Investment , invested EUR 500 million as the anchor investor in a EUR 2 billion critical minerals fund managed by InfraVia, an infrastructure asset manager. In contrast to the approach taken by the US LPO and International Development Finance Corporation , which has invested directly in specific projects and companies, this investment relies on the external fund manager to identify the opportunity set and capitalise on them in alignment with French government policy. In addition to capex support, opex support measures are also adopted in ensuring the long term bankability of projects given the decades long investment horizons associated with planning, operating, and decommissioning. By lowering operating costs associated with mineral extraction and processing and helping stabilise long term cash flows, higher cost operations can improve economic competitiveness, thus helping the aim of diversification. One of the most prominent policy initiatives for supply chain diversification is the Inflation Reduction Act  in the United States. The use of various tax credits on both the supply and demand sides have led to significant investment in the downstream domestic supply chain as well as the formation of agreements with free trade agreement compliant upstream suppliers. In addition to investment support through capital cost tax credits , there are also production cost credits  which provide 10% production tax credit for critical mineral processors. These forms of opex support can be effective in improving the business case to stimulate new investment, but require more policy commitment as they incur sustained financial burden over the long term. Despite the attractiveness and importance of ongoing financial support mechanisms, their long term nature also makes them more sensitive to political headwinds. This is in contrast to direct capex financing mechanisms, where committed loans and disbursements cannot easily be clawed back after a change in administration. A third group of financial measures comprises options that are intended to de risk investments and crowd in other investors, rather than directly subsidising or financing projects. Common strategies include offering loan guarantees to reduce the financial risk for private investors by providing a sovereign backstop, insuring transactions against counterparty risks that may not be available at a reasonable rate from commercial insurers, and directly lowering the cost of debt by bridging the gap between rates available to public institutions and the firm or project seeking funding. These services are often offered by ECAs, which typically have expertise in risks associated with complex, multi jurisdictional projects, in addition to or as an alternative to direct financing options. For instance, the Korean Export and Import Bank, as part of the government’s five year plan to support battery supply chains, has increased the maximum loan size from 40% of the owner’s equity to 50%, in addition to a preferential rate up to 120 basis points  lower. Furthermore, the Korea Trade Insurance Corporation has announced an insurance policy discount of up to 20% in addition to increases in loan guarantees available. In 2022, Canada’s Critical Minerals Strategy introduced the 30% Critical Mineral Exploration Tax Credit  aimed at helping companies raise equity capital by incentivising investors with tax benefits associated with flow through shares. This functions by allowing investors to claim a tax deduction equivalent to a portion of exploration expenditures incurred by the company. The CMETC acts in parallel with, but cannot be claimed in addition to, the existing Mineral Exploration Tax Credit  of 15%. The METC, originally set to expire in March 2024, was extended to March 2025. The Prospectors and Developers Association of Canada estimates that flow through share financing contributes over 65% of the funds raised on Canadian stock exchanges for exploration across the country. These tax credits do not subsidise upstream companies directly, but serve to encourage equity investment during the high risk exploration phase. Many of these policy intervention tools  are intended to support national or regional strategies to decrease the geographic concentration of critical mineral supply chains. This can involve developments in either domestic projects or foreign projects with strategically aligned states. Government departments and policy banks typically focus their spending on domestic projects and firms. For those without domestic reserves, DFIs and ECAs are the preferred vehicle given their specific mandate for foreign transactions. SWFs and policy banks with broad investment mandates are not common in advanced economies seeking to diversify their critical minerals supply chains, but there are examples elsewhere. For example, the Saudi Public Investment Fund, which has a wide ranging mandate to actively invest over the long term to maximise sustainable returns, has taken an active position in global critical mineral supply chains as a financier of domestic and foreign projects. Financial support from public agencies and institutions not only directly supports investments in projects, but may also serve three important but indirect functions: intergovernmental policy signalling to mitigate potential geopolitical risks, crowding in private capital, and freeing up funds for redeployment. Given the financial challenges associated with supply chain diversification, there are several aspects to consider when countries introduce policy intervention tools to support financing. First, cross agency coordination. The multiple risks associated with mineral value chains , geopolitical, financial, environmental, etc. , mean that the expertise of various departments and agencies is required to ensure that investments meet domestic and international guidelines. Furthermore, investment mandates of agencies such as government policy banks and DFIs often overlap but without a specific mandate to focus on mineral security. Coordination and information sharing between agencies can contribute to strategic alignment, ensuring efficient allocation of resources. Second, tailored, fit for purpose investments. Given the numerous policy options available, investments in critical mineral supply chains should be tailored to meet specific strategic objectives, such as reducing import dependency, improving environmental sustainability, and ensuring the economic viability of domestic resources. A wide range of investment structures should be evaluated for their ability to address the unique risks at each stage of the supply chain. Finally, financial incentives should aim to be synergistic across the whole value chain, rather than focusing narrowly on one sector. In particular, midstream processing of mined material into intermediate products is often lacking the support seen for end use sectors. Every country’s strategy on critical minerals will inevitably reflect its specific circumstances, but it would be a mistake for such strategies to focus only on increased exploration, mining and refining investment. A comprehensive approach to security and sustainability of supply needs to also address the demand side of the equation, which plays a crucial role in narrowing supply demand gaps while simultaneously mitigating the potential environmental and social harms associated with resource extraction and use. This encompasses elements such as innovation, recycling, behavioural measures and rigorous sustainability standards. The importance of unlocking the power of technology and recycling has long been a theme of IEA analysis and this was one of the key takeaways from the first ever IEA Critical Minerals and Clean Energy Summit in September 2023. Recycling creates a secondary supply of minerals that relieves the pressure on primary supply from mining and refining. A strong focus on recycling can deliver triple benefits: complementing primary mineral supplies, improving security of supply for regions with limited resource endowments and enhancing environmental performance and waste management. For base metals such as aluminium, recycling practices are well established, but this is not yet the case for many energy transition minerals such as lithium, nickel  and rare earth elements . For battery metals, today’s feedstock for recycling is dominated by electronic waste and scrap from manufacturing processes, but this is set to change by the end of the decade as the first generation of electric vehicles reach the end of their life. Globally, around 30 GWh of spent electric car batteries is expected to be available for recycling by the end of the decade. While recycling would not eliminate the need for continued investment in new supplies, we estimate that by 2040, recycled quantities of copper, lithium, nickel and cobalt from clean energy applications could reduce primary supply requirements for key minerals by 10 30%. The security benefits of recycling can be far greater for regions with wider deployment of clean energy technologies due to greater economies of scale. A strong example of the environmental benefits comes from the aluminium industry, where recycling of post consumer scrap has been shown to reduce emissions by 90% compared with primary aluminium. Furthermore, recent studies show that total GHG emissions for manufacturing a nickel rich lithium ion battery cell can be around 28% lower if made from recycled materials rather than virgin minerals. Recovering minerals from mine waste, also known as tailings reprocessing, is a growing area of interest. As ore grades decline, larger amounts of wastes are generated during mining, increasing the economic and environmental cost of tailings management. Advancements in processing technologies mean that some tailings have grades comparable to currently economical ore deposits. Thus, reprocessing can have various benefits: revenue opportunities, water recovery and environmental impact mitigation. Technology advances also have a major role in alleviating potential supply strains. For example, significant reductions in the use of silver and silicon in solar cells over the past decade have contributed to a spectacular rise in deployment of solar PV. For grids, our projections indicate that deploying high voltage direct current transmission lines more widely in electricity networks has the potential to shrink their material demand by 3% in 2030 and 10% in 2050. Similarly, a sensitivity case covering an accelerated global adoption of lithium iron phosphate chemistries and sodium ion batteries could reduce mineral demand for EV batteries by around 13% in 2030 and 18% in 2050 compared to the NZE Scenario’s base case. Energy demand depends on the behavioural choices of millions of consumers worldwide. Behavioural changes are actions that energy consumers take to reduce wasteful or unnecessary energy consumption. Many of these changes take place as part of daily life, and involve using energy differently or using less of it. These changes depend in part on individual choices and evolving socio cultural norms. However, it is systemic transformations brought about by targeted and well designed policy interventions that count most in changing consumer behaviour, and these often depend on the availability of infrastructure of one kind or another. Behavioural changes in the NZE Scenario help to bring about a more equitable and just energy transition. But in terms of critical minerals, behavioural changes can also imply a more tempered demand that can help narrow the demand supply gap, especially changes in behaviour related to transport needs. In 2022, electric SUVs accounted for over half of global electric car sales for the first time ever and took up 16% of total SUV sales. Such a consumer preference is contributing to a further increase in mineral demand as SUVs require larger batteries to power them. Behavioural changes and targeted measures to tame the appetite for SUVs and other large vehicles could result in considerable demand reduction for battery metals. IEA projections based on these specific sensitivity cases show that measures to promote smaller electric cars lead to a more than 10% reduction in battery mineral demand by 2030 projected in the NZE Scenario, compared with a counterfactual case where SUV demand continues to grow. In February 2024, the city of Paris took measures to moderate the average size of cars on the roads by voting for elevated parking tariffs for larger private vehicles. Other behavioural measures that can reduce car traffic and thereby, not just gasoline demand from internal combustion engine vehicles but also demand for battery metals for EVs, include increased share of carpooling, active modes of transportation and public transit in total road passenger transport. The IEA recently showed that, in the case of lithium, the combination of smaller EV battery sizes, alternative chemistries and recycling could reduce demand for lithium by 25% in 2030 in the NZE Scenario, saving an amount similar to today’s production volumes. With these reductions, new supplies would need to grow by 20% per year between today and 2030. The lithium industry managed to deliver this scale of growth in recent years. For example, lithium raw material supply grew by roughly 20% per year over the past five years. Global battery recycling capacity surpassed 300 GWh in 2023, of which more than 80% was located in China, far ahead of Europe and the United States with under 2% each. Many technology developers and industry actors are seeking to position themselves in the future market for end of life EV management and have announced considerable capacity expansions. If all announced projects are developed in full and on time, global battery recycling capacity could exceed 1 500 GWh in 2030, of which 70% is in China, and about 10% each in Europe and the United States. The main sources of supply for battery recycling plants in 2030 will be EV battery production scrap, accounting for half of supply, and retired EV batteries, accounting for about 20%. From 2030, end of life batteries surpass manufacturing scrap as the primary source of recycling. Policy measures, including standardisation and alignment of battery waste and transportation codes , the implementation of extended producer responsibility principles for EV batteries, the development of comprehensive collection infrastructure, and the initiation of information and communication campaigns, all play pivotal roles in encouraging the uptake of battery recycling. Despite the undeniably significant role of batteries in total mineral demand, as the clean energy transition ramps up in almost every major region, recycling efforts will need to extend to technologies beyond batteries as well. In addition to scaling up recycling infrastructure, efforts also need to be directed towards the maintenance and repair of products that will enable longer use. The share of secondary supply in mineral demand has remained fairly stable for the last decade, but this changes rapidly in the NZE Scenario. The share of secondary supply for nickel needs to grow from around 1% today to 3% in 2030, and that of lithium from 3% to 5% in the same period. By 2040, secondary supply share of most major critical minerals would need to reach at least 15% under the NZE Scenario. If the share of secondary supply were to stay at today’s levels, capital requirements for mining to meet demand in climate driven scenarios would have been a third higher, highlighting the significance of recycling in alleviating pressure on primary supply. Repair, refurbishment and remanufacturing is extending product lifetimes to reduce the need for new production, such as Siemens Gamesa’s lifetime extension program for wind turbines. Recycling is collecting, processing, and reusing materials that would otherwise be discarded as waste, with measures like minimum recycled content requirements and extended producer responsibility regulations. Substitution is using renewable or more sustainable materials, such as chemistry changes for electric vehicle batteries. Material efficiency is designing products and processes to minimize material use, waste, and environmental impact, such as reducing iridium loading in electrolyser manufacturing. Product as a Service is adopting business models that provide services instead of selling products, like vehicle sharing schemes to increase asset utilization. Behavioral changes involve encouraging individuals to adopt more sustainable habits, such as choosing smaller vehicles or reducing private car journeys by using public transportation. Despite strong expected increases in demand, market transparency of commodities such as cobalt, lithium, and rare earth elements remains limited, challenging price hedging and discouraging investment and risk assessments. Market transparency covers both the question of pricing , including efficient market price discovery mechanisms and financial tools to hedge price risks , and information , the importance of publicly available data on consumption, supply, inventories, trade and ESG performance. Transparency of pricing and market information brings important benefits to all aspects of the supply chain: producers and consumers are able to hedge their price risk, plan their stocks and production, and negotiate fair contracts. Merchants and intermediaries are able to correct global supply and demand imbalances as efficiently as possible. Governments benefit by being able to plan ahead and ensure supply continuity. Information transparency enables the anticipation of potential risk areas, allowing policymakers to target support where it is most needed. The primary element of a well functioning market for minerals and metals is transparency of pricing. Efficient price discovery processes provide two main benefits to the market: first, they offer clearer market signals, aiding informed investment decisions second, they facilitate the development of financial tools to mitigate risks, allowing for hedging by midstream operators  and downstream consumers. In a developed, sophisticated market, this means that there is a clear “spot” price , as well as a futures price curve , that is information about prices for delivery months or years into the future. While some commodities such as copper and aluminium already benefit from established and regulated exchanges with ample liquidity, not all critical minerals benefit from such levels of market maturity. Many of their markets contend with market concentration, insufficient liquidity, and reliance on bilateral contracts. There are broadly four stages of development in price transparency. Some commodities, such as copper and nickel, are already traded on regulated exchanges, where both spot and future contracts can be publicly traded , but derivatives can also often be traded outside of these exchanges, as over the counter  forward contracts, where prices are less easily tracked . For others, such as lithium and cobalt, there are signs of growing trade activities at major exchanges, while remaining significantly less liquid . Although traded derivatives markets are important in assessing market participants’ expectations, OTC financial contracts are of particular utility in risk management, as they allow more effective price hedging. For the less liquid markets, market players rely on unregulated spot auction platforms  or surveys from price reporting agencies   or other key market actors, who may , or may not , meet the principles set out by the International Organization of Securities Commissions . The different stages of market maturity discussed here are indicative, and each element may face different circumstances. Price data are often much more limited for midstream processing than refined material. While for some commodities, such as copper, “treatment and refining charges”  are tracked by agencies, data are less available for other commodities. The absence of data on refining costs and prices, as well as existing capacities and stockpiles, restricts further investments in midstream capacities, and thus their diversification. Some of the smaller commodities may have structurally insufficient liquidity pools for market based price discovery mechanisms. In these cases, policymakers could consider various ways to incentivise or encourage contributions by market participants to PRAs’ platforms who adhere to the IOSCO principles or their equivalents, or to enhance data collection from businesses. Regulated markets also require deep liquidity pools for effective price discovery. In this context, governments could avoid actions that would further fragment liquidity pools. For cobalt and lithium in particular, there is a question as to whether physically deliverable contracts could be possible. This would have the advantage of providing stocks data to the market, which gives some proxy data to the market as to supply and demand. Finally, there is a growing interest in pricing schemes that incorporate ESG performance. While many PRAs are introducing new price indices, it is uncertain whether these indices would achieve sufficient liquidity without policy and regulatory support to encourage consumers to consider sustainability aspects in their procurement decisions. Understanding critical mineral production and refining also relies both on public data and on mining and supply chain actors, with multiple benefits: allowing more informed investment decisions, facilitating supply risk identification along the supply chain, enabling systematic tracking of ESG performance, informing due diligence efforts, facilitating audit and verification of claims and ensuring better accountability. However, information transparency faces significant challenges , insufficient publicly available data, particularly on the midstream, underlaid by a lack of consensus on what data could or should be shared through the supply chain, and further disclosed to the public and consumers. Some nations already disclose significant data on mining volumes, given the economic and social importance of this activity in their jurisdictions. Stock exchanges and their regulators, particularly in Canada  and Australia , have also played a crucial role in making more data on production and reserves of publicly traded mining companies accessible. Public data initiatives have the potential to offer valuable insights to stakeholders in the market. While some disclosures have been made under the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative , countries do not necessarily systematically disclose the information even if it is required under EITI. In addition to private disclosures from publicly traded companies, efforts are underway to classify and make data on resources more readily available, often held by geological surveys, with the United Nations Framework Classification for Resources . For refining and trade, public statistics face challenges in portraying what is now becoming an essential section of many economies , even though they play a critical role in understanding complex supply chains. In particular, the Harmonised System  codes can facilitate access to trade data for materials of growing importance. However, key commodities such as lithium ore, concentrate and chemicals or cobalt and manganese sulphates, essential to the EV battery, do not yet have harmonised codes, hindering efficient tracking of trade flows. Likewise, information about regional consumption is relatively lacking compared with production volumes, which hampers the granular understanding of market balances. All of these underscore the necessity of launching efforts to systematically collect reliable data consistently, beginning with identifying areas where publicly available data are most lacking. Traceability tools can also be a technical enabler, though not an end goal in themselves. There is a growing interest in decentralised databases, but the underlying challenge often lies in defining which data should be shared to achieve transparency objectives, in what frequency with whom this data should be shared how accountable data producers are and iv) whether public enforcement is necessary to provide adequate incentives and ensure adherence to best practices. The foremost reason to address the ESG risks within the mineral supply chain is to protect people, communities and the environment. Robust efforts to ensure that supply chains are responsible and sustainable will be necessary to ensure that energy transitions are people centred and that the benefits associated with mineral production, such as revenue and jobs, are captured in producer countries and communities. In parallel, improving the ESG performance of mineral supply chains can yield important security of supply benefits. In fact, without serious efforts to mitigate the ESG risks associated with mineral supply chains, there may not be sufficient supplies to support the rapid scale up of clean energy technologies that is needed to reach climate goals and to avert the worst effects of climate change. Governments and companies alike have a role in developing sustainable and responsible supply chains. While companies may champion sustainable and responsible practices and transparently monitor progress, governments play a crucial role in incentivising corporate action and creating a regulatory environment conducive to high ESG standards. While there are many ESG risks that can lead to supply disruptions, we have identified six priority areas that have particularly important implications for security of supply: water, GHG emissions, biodiversity, human rights, communities and corruption. Each of these risks impacts security of supply in a different way, but broadly, failures in these areas can limit market access, create legal barriers, discourage investment, damage reputation, increase the likelihood of opposition from local communities, and in some cases physically prevent projects from operating. Critical minerals are often situated in regions characterised by elevated water stress. Developing infrastructure that ensures secure water access for local communities can help companies prevent conflicts where water access is limited. Policy responses that encourage water stewardship include conditioning public investment to or establishing specific targets for water quality, use and effluents that improve over time. Companies that do not reduce and report GHG emissions face risks to market access and their reputation. Corporate reporting can build onto existing standards and external verification to provide transparent and credible data. Investment in on site renewables and energy efficiency can help drive decarbonisation efforts. Governments can improve or expand GHG reporting requirements and ensure that data on emissions are publicly available. Operations that fail to address biodiversity impacts may face regulatory barriers and reputational and investment risks , especially for mineral deposits located in key biodiversity areas. Companies can minimise land use and related impacts by working on project design and implementing technologies tailored to each site. Governments can strengthen biodiversity protections in mining regulations and permits and improve monitoring and disclosure of biodiversity data. Enhancing human rights standards in mining operations can mitigate operational disruptions and reduce divestment resulting from human rights violations, including child labour and forced labour. Corporations and governments can enable supply chain transparency by embedding human rights risks in due diligence systems or regulatory frameworks, while supporting the continued implementation and enforcement of protections. Meaningful engagement with local communities and Indigenous Peoples can help projects obtain and maintain a social licence to operate. This rests on credible local community and Indigenous Peoples led consultation schemes. Free, prior and informed consent of Indigenous Peoples and potentially impacted communities is a best practice, where not already required by law. Reducing corruption and governance risks can facilitate investment and strengthen public confidence in mining operations. This can be supported by targeted policies and the disclosure of permits, licences, and contracts company beneficial ownership and payments to governments. Considering the available levers for action, we have developed five key recommendations for policy makers to ensure that critical mineral value chains are sustainable and responsible Ensure legal and regulatory protections for the environment, workers, Indigenous Peoples and communities, backed by sufficient means of implementation and enforcement. Channel public spending to encourage the development of better practices and to incentivise good performance. Strengthen the collection and reporting of granular and standardised data to enable benchmarking and progress tracking throughout the supply chain. Improve transparency throughout the supply chain, including by enhancing traceability, undertaking due diligence and reporting publicly on risks and mitigation actions. Support the development of initiatives that help companies demonstrate that their operations are sustainable and responsible while ensuring cross compatibility and interoperability. Governments can play an important role in promoting improvements by incorporating the recommendations into their policy and investment decisions. These five recommendations are cross cutting and can apply to all ESG risks. The expected pace of demand growth is assessed by comparing the average annual demand growth rate in climate driven scenarios to historical growth rates. A high risk occurs when the demand growth between 2023 and 2030 is over two times higher than historical growth rates. A medium risk occurs when the demand growth is more than 20% higher than historical rates. A low risk occurs when the demand growth is similar to or lower than historical rates. Short term market balances are based on the balance between expected supply  and primary supply requirements in 2026. A high risk is considered when the expected supply falls short of STEPS primary requirements in 2026. A medium risk is considered when the expected supply meets STEPS requirements but falls short of APS needs. A low risk is considered when the expected supply exceeds APS primary requirements in 2026. Long term market balances in climate driven scenarios are evaluated by comparing expected supply to primary supply requirements in 2040. A high risk occurs when the expected supply covers less than 60% of APS primary requirements for 2040. A medium risk occurs when the expected supply covers 60,80% of APS requirements. A low risk occurs when the expected supply meets over 80% of APS primary requirements. Observed price volatility is based on the standard deviation of historical monthly prices between 2011 and 2023. A high risk is considered when the standard deviation of historical prices exceeds 35. A medium risk is considered when the standard deviation is between 25 and 35. A low risk is considered when the standard deviation is below 25. The impact on clean energy cost is measured by the share of a material in the total cost of end use technologies. A high risk occurs when price spikes could hinder the deployment of final technologies. A medium risk occurs when there is a moderate impact on the final clean energy cost. A low risk occurs when the impact on the final clean energy cost is limited. Geographical concentration of mined supply is evaluated based on the expected share of the top three producing mining countries in 2030. A high risk is present when the top three countries collectively hold over 80% of the supply, or the top country controls more than two thirds of the global supply. A medium risk occurs when the top three countries hold between 65% and 80% of the supply, or the top country controls more than 50%. A low risk occurs when the top three countries hold less than 65%, and the top country controls less than 50%. Geographical concentration of refined supply is measured by the expected share of the top three producing refining countries in 2030. A high risk occurs when the top three countries collectively hold over 80% of the supply, or the top country controls more than two thirds. A medium risk occurs when the top three countries hold between 65% and 80%, or the top country controls more than 50%. A low risk is identified when the top three countries control less than 65%, and the top country has less than 50% of the global supply. N 1 supply and demand balances are assessed by the share of N 1 supply in meeting N 1 material requirements in 2030, based on a refined product basis. A high risk occurs when N 1 supply meets less than 35% of requirements in the APS . A medium risk occurs when N 1 supply meets between 35% and 60% of requirements in the APS. A low risk is identified when N 1 supply meets over 60% of requirements in the APS. Export risks of major suppliers are evaluated through the weighted average export restriction risk score of the current production portfolio for mining and refining. A high risk is considered when the weighted average country risk score exceeds 4. A medium risk is identified when the score is between 2,5 and 4. A low risk is present when the average country risk score is below 2,5. Hurdles to develop new projects in diversified regions are assessed based on the challenges in building supply chains in geographically diverse regions. A high risk occurs when new capacities require significantly higher capital and operating costs  and have a long lead time. A medium risk occurs when new capacities need to overcome moderate capital, lead time, and technological barriers. A low risk occurs when capital, lead time, and technological barriers are manageable. Visible stock levels are measured by stock visibility in major exchanges. A high risk is considered when stock visibility is limited. A medium risk occurs when monitoring stock levels is possible but volumes are lower than historical averages. A low risk occurs when there is ample visible stock in major exchanges. Transparency of pricing schemes is qualitatively assessed by examining market liquidity and transparency of pricing schemes. A high risk occurs when pricing is driven mainly by survey pricing and unregulated platforms with limited liquidity. A medium risk occurs when early stage regulated market trading is available but with limited liquidity. A low risk is present when there is established regulated market trading with ample liquidity. Availability of options to moderate demand is evaluated based on the availability of demand side options and technology switching options to manage demand growth in case of supply tightness. A high risk occurs when limited opportunities exist to reduce demand without sacrificing performance. A medium risk is present when there is scope for technology switching and behavioral changes to reduce demand, but it requires significant time and cost commitment. A low risk occurs when viable opportunities exist to reduce demand within a short period. Status of secondary supply is measured by the share of secondary supply in total supply and its potential for growth. A high risk occurs when the share of secondary supply remains low and shows no significant improvement. A medium risk occurs when the share of secondary supply remains low but is improving, or when the share is high but shows limited improvement. A low risk is present when the share of secondary supply remains high and continues to improve.
