The last decade has seen the share of fossil fuels in the global energy mix gradually come down from 82% in 2013 to 80% in 2023. Demand for energy has increased by 15% over this period and 40% of this growth has been met by clean energy, that is renewables in the power and end use sectors, nuclear, and low emissions fuels, including carbon capture, utilisation and storage. In advanced economies, overall energy demand declined on average by 0,5% per year over the past decade. Oil demand peaked in this grouping in 2005, coal has been in structural decline since 2008 while natural gas, in aggregate, has ceased to grow. Nuclear has fallen around one half percentage point per year, while renewables have increased by 3% per year since 2013. In emerging market and developing economies – a grouping that includes almost 85% of the world’s population – energy demand increased at around 2,6% per year over the last decade. The underlying drivers are a rise in the population of more than 720 million people, a 50% rise in the size of the economy and a 40% increase in industrial output. Floorspace in buildings has increased by 40 000 square kilometres, enough to cover the entirety of the Netherlands. With this rapid rate of development, clean energy has to work harder to displace oil, gas and coal in emerging market and developing economies than in advanced economies. In the Stated Policies Scenario, clean energy deployment accelerates as the pace of overall energy demand growth slows, leading to a peak in all three fossil fuels before 2030 . Increasing reductions in coal demand means it is overtaken by natural gas in the global energy mix by 2030. Clean energy grows more than total energy demand between 2023 and 2035. Led by surging solar photovoltaic and wind power, clean energy becomes the largest source of energy in the mid 2030s. Although the STEPS sees a threefold increase in renewables that brings fossil fuel use down from 80% of total energy demand in 2023 to 58% in 2050, this falls far short of the step change that occurs in the Announced Pledges Scenario and the Net Zero Emissions by 2050  Scenario, especially the latter. In both these scenarios, renewables begin to rapidly eat into the fossil fuel market share. By 2035, clean energy meets 40% of global energy demand in the APS, and this rises to nearly three quarters by 2050. In the NZE Scenario, clean energy meets 90% of global energy demand in 2050. Around one third of the remaining fossil fuel demand in the NZE Scenario is fully abated, around half is used as a feedstock or in other non energy use, and the remainder is offset by direct air capture, negative emissions from bioenergy or other forms of carbon removal. Historically, the expansion of gross domestic product growth has been faster than the rate of energy demand growth, reflecting improvements in the energy intensity of GDP. These improvements in energy intensity continue and even accelerate in our scenarios: global GDP continues to expand, but it takes steadily less energy to fuel this growth . Electric technologies such as heat pumps and electric vehicles deliver energy services more efficiently than those reliant on the direct combustion of fossil fuels, and efficiency gains and electrification also arrest further growth in per capita energy consumption in emerging market and developing economies, despite higher levels of ownership of vehicles and appliances such as air conditioners. Global final energy consumption currently stands at 445 exajoules . In the STEPS, this rises steadily to over 530 EJ by 2050. In the APS and NZE Scenario, total final consumption starts to fall back . It is 3% lower than current levels of demand by 2035 in the APS, and 15% lower in the NZE Scenario. In the APS, energy efficiency gains limit growth in consumption even as living standards continue to rise, thanks to additional retrofit targets, broader electrification, more stringent fuel economy standards in transport, and more rapid efficiency gains in industry. In the NZE Scenario, year on year energy intensity improvements more than double by 2035: this reflects both faster electrification and a more rapid phase out of traditional use of biomass, which is largely replaced by more efficient sources such as electricity and liquefied petroleum gas . Behavioural changes also play a role. Electrification accelerates across all scenarios and in all sectors, providing heating, cooling and mobility, powering motors and appliances, and producing onsite electrolytic hydrogen for heavy industry. By 2050, the share of electricity in total final consumption increases by half in the STEPS, doubles in the APS and nearly triples in the NZE Scenario, where unabated fossil fuels are swiftly replaced by electricity generated by clean sources. Along with the direct use of renewables, including modern bioenergy, solar thermal and geothermal, and low emissions hydrogen and hydrogen based fuels, the share of unabated fossil fuels by 2050 declines from today’s level by 30% in the STEPS, over 65% in the APS and 95% in the NZE Scenario. In hard to abate sectors such as aviation and shipping, biofuels and lowemissions fuels displace around 50 EJ of fossil fuels by 2050 in the NZE Scenario. CO2 emissions peak in all scenarios before 2030, but the subsequent rate of decline varies considerably. In the STEPS, emissions fall 1% per year between 2030 and 2050, led by a 3% annual decline in emissions in China, where they end up at half of the current level by 2050 . In the APS, global emissions fall by 4% per year, and in the NZE Scenario they fall by 15% per year, three times faster than the drop recorded in 2020 after the onset of the Covid 19 pandemic. The STEPS trajectory implies an average temperature increase of 2,4 degrees Celsius by 2100. In the APS, the increase is 1,7 °C, while this World Energy Outlook 2024 updated NZE Scenario shows an increasingly narrow but still achievable pathway to limiting the temperature rise to below 1,5 °C. An increasing number of emerging market and developing countries have announced targets or goals to achieve net zero CO2 or greenhouse gas emissions. They include eight outof ten Southeast Asian countries, plus India, which is targeting net zero emissions by 2070. These targets are achieved in full in the APS, driving innovation and providing incentives for consumers and private sector actors to reduce emissions. As a result, CO2 emissions from India and Southeast Asia fall by half in the APS, dropping below 2010 levels by 2050. The global energy crisis triggered by the Russian invasion of Ukraine highlighted the vulnerability of the current energy system to geopolitical events and underlined how much of an impact energy price rises can have on consumers. The immediate price shocks from the energy crisis have abated, but escalating hostilities in the Middle East and attacks on shipping in the Red Sea serve as reminders of the potential for wider world events to cause shocks to energy markets. Existing and planned fossil fuel infrastructure expansions set to come online over the next ten years should provide some buffer against potential outages, and imply downward pressure on prices . Global spare crude oil production capacity, excluding Iran and Russia, which averaged less than 3 million barrels per day in 2019, stands today at around 6 mb/d. If announced capacity additions by members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries proceed, the level of demand growth in the STEPS would mean spare capacity rising to 8 mb/d to 2030. For natural gas, a large new wave of LNG liquefaction projects is set to come online that is set to produce a surplus of LNG supply over demand until 2040 . Ample spare crude oil capacity and new LNG supplies provide buffers against the risk of sharp price shocks, but the security of fuel supplies is far from guaranteed, not least because the effectiveness of this capacity to address any shortfalls that may arise hinges on the ability of alternative sources of supply to reach an affected country or region quickly. Moreover, a general trend of increased supply concentration and rising import dependence means supply shocks – if they occur – have the potential to be more disruptive. Asia has become the focal point for global oil and gas trade: it now imports more than twice as much oil as Europe, the next largest importing region, and it eclipsed Europe as the largest market for imported natural gas in 2022 . In the STEPS, these trends continue. China – the world’s largest importer – sees its dependence on oil imports rise from around 75% today to more than 80% by 2050. Similar trends are projected for India, where natural gas dependence rises from 50% today to nearly 75%. Meanwhile, Southeast Asia, which is currently a net exporter of natural gas, becomes a net importer before 2030. Key maritime trade routes remain vital to the well being of global oil and gas markets. This includes the safe passage of ships through passages such as the Strait of Malacca and Strait of Hormuz. The Strait of Malacca is particularly important to oil and gas trade, and is set to become even more so in the future, with oil volumes increasing from 24 mb/d today to 28 mb/d in the STEPS, and LNG flows increasing from 70 billion cubic metres  in 2023  to 140 bcm in 2050. Around 20% of global oil and LNG supplies also flow through the Strait of Hormuz today, a share that remains broadly constant in the STEPS. Any disruption in either of these straits could lead to supply shortages and price volatility. A complete closure of the Strait of Hormuz, while unlikely, would be particularly damaging because there are limited alternative routes to market and because it would block off the vast majority of OPEC spare capacity. New energy security hazards are emerging as the world moves towards a more electrified and renewables rich energy system, highlighting the need for policy makers to continually adjust and assess their approach to energy security. One issue of particular concern for many policy makers today is the concentration in a small number of countries of clean energy supply chains for manufacturing capacity and critical mineral mining and processing. China has a very large proportion of existing manufacturing capacity for key clean energy technologies. This includes 85 95% of global manufacturing capacity for battery cathode and anode materials, more than 80% of global solar PV manufacturing capacity, and more than 75 90% of the global processing capacity for cobalt, graphite and rare earth elements. A wide range of countries are looking to bolster domestic clean energy manufacturing. Both the US Inflation Reduction Act and the EU Net Zero Industry Act include major incentives for domestic manufacturing, and around 10% of the USD 2 trillion clean energy investment earmarked by governments around the world since 2020 comes with conditions that require local content. Some countries are also taking steps in their trade policies to address concerns about aspects of current trade in clean energy manufacturing through tariff adjustments, antidumping duties and countervailing measures. There are some signs of success in efforts to diversify supply chains. In battery cell manufacturing, for example, announced capacity additions in Europe and the United States should be sufficient to meet the 2030 domestic deployment needs associated with their climate goals, provided that all planned projects come online as scheduled. In many other clean energy supply chains, however, a large portion of planned projects are being developed in precisely the regions where most capacity is already located . For example, some 50 95% of supply growth between 2023 and 2035 for refined copper, lithium, nickel and cobalt is projected to take place in today’s largest producer, such as China or Indonesia. Another concern is the level of critical mineral supplies that are available. For a number of critical minerals, supply growth from the pipeline of confirmed and announced projects is set to be slower than expected growth in demand. The situation is most pressing for copper and lithium, highlighting some new risks to supply security and clean energy transitions. Market signals should lead to the development of new projects, although new mining projects tend to have very long lead times. On the demand side, changes in battery chemistries or enhanced efforts for recycling may succeed in reducing demand. Policy makers need to be alert to the new energy security risks that are emerging in clean energy and look for ways to mitigate them. However, there are some important differences between the risks for consumers associated with clean energy and those that arise from traditional fuels. With traditional fuels, a shortage in supply means that consumers immediately face higher prices to continue operating existing equipment such as cars and boilers. With clean energy, a shortage in supplies would tend to increase the cost of new equipment but would have little immediate effect on the cost of using existing equipment. Electric vehicles provide the main mechanism to decarbonise the road transport sector. Their prospects in recent years have been bolstered by ambitious plans from governments and the EV and battery industries . However, the transition to mass market adoption is unlikely to be linear, and additional efforts are required to achieve the right balance of incentives for broader consumer uptake, to ensure that adequate charging infrastructure is in place and to reinforce electricity grids. Over 7 million electric cars were sold in the first half of 2024, which represents an increase of close to 25% compared to the same period a year ago. The share of EVs in the total global car fleet is likely to approach around 5% by the end of 2024. China accounts for nearly 80% of the increase, with sales rising from more than 3 million in the first half of 2023 to over 4 million in the first half of 2024. Even if China is set to one side, however, the overall percentage rise in sales elsewhere in the global market is over 10%. While sales in the European Union remained flat, with a decline in Germany offsetting a rise elsewhere of around 3% on average, the United Kingdom saw a 15% rise, and the United States recorded an increase of nearly 10%. Large jumps in year on year sales also occurred in nascent EV markets such as Brazil, Indonesia, Mexico, the Caspian region and the Middle East. One important trend is the rising share of plug in hybrid electric vehicle sales, which accounted for over 35% of total EV sales in the first half of 2024. In China, the PHEV sales increase was largely driven by range extended electric vehicles which have longer driving ranges due to larger batteries. This provides an average electric range of around 130 kilometres , compared with 80 km for a standard PHEV . Sales of PHEVs, including REEVs, surged by 70% in China, while sales of battery electric vehicles rose by only 15%. Similarly, in the United States PHEV sales increased by 25%, compared to just 5% for BEVs. This highlights the need for an expansion of recharging infrastructure to ease range anxiety. EV sales are anticipated to be robust over the rest of 2024, with around 17 million electric cars being sold over the course of the year. China is expected to continue dominating global growth, with electric car sales topping over 10 million during 2024. It is worth noting in this context that the EV market in China has maintained strong momentum through August, with monthly sales exceeding 1 million units . The continuing rise in EV sales is well above what was predicted by some analysts in 2022 when battery costs increased by 7%. In fact, this increase prompted the battery industry to adopt different chemistries that require less cobalt and nickel, and this – together with further developments in battery technology – has led battery cell prices to drop below USD 80 per kilowatt hour during the first nine months of 2024. Challenges and uncertainties are inevitable, but there are strong underlying reasons why EV sales are likely to continue to expand rapidly. One of the most important is that battery prices are continuing to fall, prompting automakers to reduce EV sticker prices. Key automakers in the United States have reduced the price of their main models by more than USD 10 000, for example . Chinese automakers have also made price reductions of around USD 1 600 compared to 2022 . European automakers are meanwhile planning to launch seven new models in 2025 priced at under USD 28 000 . While some automakers have adjusted their short term targets and made slight changes to their longer term 2030 projections, their commitment to EVs remains robust across the board. The same is true for the battery industry globally, which is currently experiencing consolidation rather than a reduction in plans. Although some incentive schemes have been revised, governments remain active in supporting EV uptake in a variety of ways . China recently launched a new tradein policy to encourage drivers to scrap less efficient vehicles and replace them with either electric or more efficient ones, and is looking at ways to speed development of charging infrastructure. In the European Union, stringent CO2 standards are prompting automakers to expand EV production. The United States aims to increase EV uptake by providing subsidies under the Inflation Reduction Act and to support the development of charging infrastructure under the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act. But there is much still to do, and delays in the roll out of charging infrastructure or in policy implementation could lead to the market share of electric cars in 2030 being about ten percentage points lower than projected in the STEPS, though this would still mean a big increase in EV shares from current levels . In energy terms, the adoption of EVs means a shift from a fossil fuel based mobility system to one that relies much more on critical minerals, and a linking of the transport and power sectors. There are clear synergies between manufacturing batteries for EVs and for energy storage, and processes from one industry can benefit the other. For example, EV batteries could be repurposed for storage applications. They could also support grid flexibility through smart charging, helping to optimise grid load, and through bi directional charging, supplying power to buildings or the grid . In the STEPS, electricity demand from EVs rises from 115 TWh today to around 1 000 TWh by 2030 – an amount equivalent to today’s electricity demand in Japan. This increase accounts for around 15% of total global electricity demand growth. Significant as this is, the impact of EVs on the oil market is even more significant . Over the past decade, road transport has increased oil demand by 4,2 mb/d, accounting for more than 45% of global oil demand growth. However, oil demand for passenger cars declines by 1 mb/d from today’s levels by 2030, and this is largely responsible for global oil demand reaching a peak by the end of this decade in the STEPS. With renewables providing an ever increasing share of power generation, electro mobility helps to drive the world towards its climate commitments, and EVs displace nearly 10 billion barrels of oil from 2020 to 2030, avoiding a total of over 4 gigatonnes of carbon dioxide emissions in the process. In the STEPS, nearly one in two cars sold are electric by 2030. In the NZE Scenario, electric cars account for over two thirds of sales by 2030. Achieving this level requires further movement in a number of areas. One of the most pressing is cost differentials. Despite recent price reductions, on average an electric car is USD 10 000 15 000 more expensive than a comparable conventional internal combustion engine vehicle, though this is much less of an issue in China, where over 60% of electric cars are priced below their conventional counterparts . Another critical issue is the need for extensive charging infrastructure. To achieve a two thirds market share of electric cars, investment of nearly USD 1000 billion will be required from now until 2030, which represents a 45% increase over levels in the STEPS. A third issue is meeting the demand for batteries. Annual EV battery demand reaches around 5,5 TWh by 2030 in the NZE Scenario, up from 0,8 TWh in 2023. However, the battery industry seems well positioned to meet this escalating demand, with recent announcements and developments indicating a robust capacity to scale up production and develop technology. The global energy economy is increasingly electrifying. Since 2010, electricity demand has increased on average by 2,7% per year, while overall energy demand has risen by 1,4% per year. Electricity is increasingly being used in place of fossil fuels to provide heat, mobility and industrial energy demand. Innovations such as smart grids and advances in the efficiency of electric motors and appliances have also boosted the appeal of electricity. The share of electricity in total final consumption rises more rapidly than in the past in all three scenarios and across nearly all regions. This trend is a consequence of increased electrification in households and commercial buildings as well as in transport and industry. Most of this demand growth is from emerging market and developing economies. China dominates, but other countries make a significant contribution, especially after 2030. However, the pace of demand growth – and the uncertainties surrounding it – also pose challenges for ensuring a secure, affordable and sustainable electricity supply. In the STEPS, global electricity demand nearly doubles by 2050, rising to 50 000 TWh from 26 000 TWh in 2023. From 2023 to 2035 alone, growth averages nearly 1 000 TWh per year, equivalent to adding another Japan to global electricity consumption each year. Trends vary by sector. The transport sector has the lowest current rate of electrification in final consumption, but it also sees the fastest rate of projected demand growth as EVs account for a rising share of vehicle sales . Increased space cooling and appliance ownership drive electricity demand growth in the buildings sector, underpinned by economic expansion. Electrification in industry is also a significant factor. Emerging market and developing economies are projected to contribute nearly 80% of growth in electricity demand to 2030 in the STEPS, with China alone making up over 45% of the global growth total . China’s energy sector has electrified particularly fast, with electricity rising from 11% of final consumption in 2000 to 26% in 2023: a major cause was surging electricity use in the buildings sector, with growing incomes leading to rapid increases in appliances and demand for space cooling, while space heating has also increasingly been electrified. China’s demand rises further in the coming decades, with the rapid uptake of EVs being a key driver. The story in India is similar, though starting from a lower base: the share of electricity in final consumption rose in India from 11% in 2000 to 18% in 2023, and half of the electricity demand growth to 2050 is projected in the STEPS to come in the buildings sector. After a period of slower growth, trends in advanced economies are changing. In the United States, the share of electricity in final consumption was static from 2010 to 2023 at under 22%, but it rises to nearly 40% by 2050 in the STEPS, with an expanding EV fleet accounting for 65% of overall demand growth. After falling in recent years, electricity demand in the European Union is also shifting back to growth, and the share of electricity in final consumption today more than doubles to 45% in 2050 in the STEPS. Rising demand from EVs is again one of the main causes, along with more electrification of space heating in the buildings sector. Electricity demand is subject to major uncertainties, and could be higher or lower than projected. One key uncertainty revolves around possible variations in the outlook for the building sector, which in the STEPS is set to deliver nearly 45% of electricity demand growth in final consumption by 2035, mostly from increased cooling and appliance use. Demand for space cooling in buildings rises at an average annual rate of 3,7% to 2035 in the STEPS. Over 90% of this growth takes place in emerging market and developing economies, where economic growth and rising incomes drive air conditioner ownership, while a warming global climate boosts demand and leads to air conditioners having to work harder to provide cooling . As well as raising overall demand, cooling is projected to lead to higher peaks in demand, putting additional strain on power grids. Demand growth from cooling could be even stronger than projected in the STEPS. Heat waves trigger increased demand for air conditioning, as seen in the prolonged recent heat wave in India, which reportedly doubled sales of cooling units . A sensitivity analysis exploring the impact of more frequent, intense and lengthy heat waves on air conditioner ownership and usage finds that they could increase electricity demand for cooling in 2035 by as much as 700 TWh  more than projected in the STEPS . About 80% of this additional increase occurs in emerging market and developing economies, mostly in developing Asia . Energy efficiency improvements, supported by strong policy measures, are key to moderating the fast growth projected in appliance ownership, floorspace and overall living standards. But current trends indicate limited progress on efficiency in key markets, and highlight the risk that weak, disparate efficiency standards could lock in additional demand in fast growing regions. A sensitivity analysis indicates that lower efficiencies could cause electricity demand for appliances and cooling in emerging market and developing economies to be around 340 TWh  higher than in the STEPS by 2035. By contrast, faster adoption of effective efficiency standards could result in electricity demand being almost 900 TWh lower in 2035 in these end uses than in the STEPS, highlighting the value of action in these areas to temper future demand growth . Clean energy transitions are a primary cause of fast rising global electricity demand . Faster electrification of end uses and the decarbonisation of power grids together play a vital role to improve efficiency and reduce emissions, as reflected in the APS and NZE Scenario. In 2050, total electricity demand reaches 60 000 TWh in the APS and 66 000 TWh in the NZE Scenario – as much as a third higher than the 50 000 TWh projected in the STEPS. The pace and scale of the electrification of transport is a key differentiator of electricity demand across the three World Energy Outlook  scenarios. The projected share of EV sales in total road vehicle sales reaches 70% in 2035 in the APS, compared with 55% in the STEPS, and this translates into a 465 TWh increase in electricity demand from road transport in the APS compared to the STEPS. In the NZE Scenario, near universal adoption of EVs by 2035 means a 1 500 TWh increase compared to the STEPS. Faster uptake of heat pumps is central to efforts to boost energy efficiency and cut fossil fuel use in buildings. Although sales of heat pumps slowed in 2023 in some regions, and saw a major slowdown in Europe in the first half of 2024, their market share in space heating is still set to almost double by 2035 in the STEPS, and to reach approximately 30% in the APS and 40% in the NZE Scenario. Their high efficiency means the additional electricity demand from heat pumps is modest, adding only around 325 TWh by 2035 in the STEPS, 445 TWh in the APS and 425 TWh in the NZE Scenario. The use of electricity to produce hydrogen, including onsite production for the steel, ammonia and refining industries, has the potential to increase demand for electricity very significantly. But the scale and timing are highly uncertain because they are contingent on how quickly different hydrogen production pathways and use develop. Electricity demand for hydrogen production increases from less than 5 TWh today to 9 000 TWh in the APS in 2050. In the NZE Scenario, electricity demand for hydrogen production reaches nearly 15 000 TWh in 2050, equivalent to over 55% of global electricity demand today. As societies come to depend ever more on electricity, especially in rapid energy transitions, reliable supply becomes paramount . Rapidly scaling up low emissions sources of electricity is a central part of any clean energy transition. While the electricity sector is the largest emitting energy sector today, a lot of action is in hand to reduce those emissions, driven by national and international commitments. For renewables, ambitious collective goals were set at COP28, including to triple global installed capacity of renewable energy by 2030, while over 150 countries have policies to expand the use of renewables in the power sector. For nuclear power, an initiative was established in December 2023 that targets a tripling of global nuclear capacity by 2050, and more than 30 countries have plans to expand their use of nuclear energy. There are additional initiatives to accelerate less mature technologies including carbon capture and low emissions hydrogen. All the actions taking place are vital to efforts to decarbonise electricity and achieve the COP28 goal of transitioning away from fossil fuels in line with net zero emissions by 2050. Many clean energy technologies are already mature. Solar PV and wind are now the cheapest electricity sources in most markets, and hydropower and bioenergy are well established contributors. A new generation of large scale nuclear reactors is being built in several countries with enhanced features, and small modular reactors are under development. In addition, the importance of a systems approach – including the need to expand and modernise electricity grids and accelerate the uptake of energy storage and demand response – is increasingly recognised as essential to deliver the most affordable and secure transitions . One of the biggest success stories in clean energy transitions to date has been the rapid rise of solar PV and wind power. Between 2010 and 2023, global solar PV capacity increased 40 times and wind power six times, with growth concentrated in China, European Union, United States and Japan. At the same time, more mature renewable energy technologies have also expanded, with bioenergy capacity increasing 2,5 times and hydropower 1,4 times. Nuclear power capacity has been broadly stable over the period. Despite these gains, growth in clean power generation has not kept pace with global electricity demand. Global output from low emissions sources of electricity, including all renewable energy technologies, nuclear, fossil fuels with carbon capture, hydrogen and ammonia, increased by 4 800 TWh from 2010 to 2023, but global electricity generation increased by nearly 8 400 TWh . Wind and solar PV together accounted for three quarters of clean power growth over the period, and hydro, bioenergy, geothermal and nuclear power  accounted for the final quarter. To fill the gap, global coalfired generation increased by almost 2 000 TWh  from 2010 to 2023 and gas fired output increased by over 1 700 TWh . As a result, electricity sector CO2 emissions increased by 20% over the period, rising from 11,4 gigatonnes  in 2010 to 13,7 Gt in 2023. In some regions, clean power has increased faster than electricity demand and reduced the need for unabated fossil fuels. Low emissions sources of electricity grew by over 20% between 2018 and 2023 in countries including Australia, Korea, Japan, Argentina, South Africa, Brazil and Mexico: in all these countries, they outstripped any electricity demand growth, leading to reductions in the use of unabated fossil fuels . Low emissions sources increased by around 10% or less in the European Union, United Kingdom and United States, but this was enough to outpace any demand growth and reduce the use of unabated fossil fuels in each case. In several emerging market and developing economies, low emissions sources were not able to keep pace with overall electricity demand growth between 2018 and 2023, leading to increased use of coal and natural gas to generate power. China is the global market leader in the deployment of clean power technologies, including solar PV, wind, hydro and nuclear power, but it has also seen coal fired power increase by over 20% and natural gas by 40% over the last five years. Since its electricity demand is far larger than that of any other country, the speed at which China transitions to clean energy is of huge significance, and it will be a landmark day when clean power growth in China outstrips overall electricity demand. India and Indonesia have increased clean power by 40% and 50% respectively over the past five years, but from a low starting point, and the use of unabated fossil fuels in the power sector has also increased significantly. Given the high level of dependence on coal in both countries, their near term plans for clean energy transitions and long term commitments to reach net zero emissions are crucially important. From 2023 to 2030, growth of clean power sources outpaces electricity demand growth globally by 20% under current policy settings and market conditions. Renewables account for the vast majority of clean power growth to 2030, and renewables investment steps up from around USD 680 billion in 2023 to USD 850 billion in 2030, delivering annual average capacity additions of more than 600 GW of solar PV, about 160 GW of wind, around 30 GW of hydropower and 12 GW of other renewables. In total, renewables capacity worldwide increases 2,3 fold to 2030 in the STEPS. Nuclear power contributes to the growth of clean power sources reflecting efforts to maintain the existing fleet of nuclear reactors and construction of new reactors in around 30 countries. As a result, electricity generation from unabated fossil fuels declines to 2030, with falls of more than 10% in coal fired power and 50% in oil fired power more than offsetting about a 5% rise for natural gas. However, transitions away from fossil fuels must move faster to fulfil announced pledges, including the pledges to triple global renewables capacity by 2030 and to pursue net zero emissions by 2050. In advanced economies, clean power increases twice as much as electricity demand to 2030, and both wind and solar PV individually nearly keep pace with electricity demand growth . Nuclear power increases due to a mix of lifetime extensions, new construction, return to operation of existing reactors in France and a progressive re start of existing reactors in Japan. Electricity generation from fossil fuels declines by 30% to 2030: coal fired power reduces by 50% and gas fired power by 15%. In emerging market and developing economies, clean power growth starts to match strong electricity demand growth in the STEPS. Clean power expands by 5 800 TWh from 2023 to 2030, and electricity sector CO2 emissions in emerging market and developing economies collectively peak in the mid 2020s. Solar PV dominates, providing over half of the increase in clean power between now and 2030 in the STEPS, with wind making the second largest contribution and hydropower, other renewables and nuclear each also delivering a share of the increase. China alone accounts for almost 70% of emerging market and developing economies clean power growth, rising fast enough to keep pace with rising demand for electricity in China. Despite this progress in emerging market and developing economies, unabated fossil fuel use in 2030 remains nearly at current levels. Coal fired power sees a slight decline over the years to 2030, while gas fired generation rises. While clean power is gaining momentum, today’s policy settings and market conditions do not deliver fast enough growth to move onto a pathway to net zero emissions. In the NZE Scenario, which does move countries collectively onto such a pathway, global clean power generation increases twice as fast to 2035 as in the STEPS. To close the gap between the STEPS and the NZE Scenario through to 2035, clean power needs to expand 1,5 times faster in China, 1,9 times faster in advanced economies, and three times faster in the other emerging market and developing economies. The faster uptake of clean power in the NZE Scenario leads to an 85% reduction in unabated coal fired power and a 55% reduction in unabated gas fired power by 2035, compared with a 35% reduction for coal fired power and virtually no change for natural gas in the STEPS. To create the widest path possible to net zero emissions, all clean power technologies make a bigger contribution to reducing emissions than they do in the STEPS, though these contributions are differentiated by how mature and accessible the technologies are, by their respective costs, and by technology preferences in various economies, which are often expressed through differences in national policies. Despite their growth in the STEPS, solar PV and wind need to expand more than any other clean energy technologies to close the gap between the STEPS and the NZE Scenario, with the latter calling for an additional 7 000 TWh of solar PV and 5 000 TWh of wind by 2035 . The additional growth required in the NZE Scenario reflects the widespread availability of solar PV and wind, the strong policy support they enjoy in most countries and their cost advantages, since they are now the cheapest new sources of electricity in most markets. In the case of solar PV, it also reflects the excess manufacturing capacity that already exists, and which is anticipated to augment in the coming years . A number of actions need to be taken to deliver the additional solar PV and wind called for in the NZE Scenario: these will vary from country to country but are likely in many cases to include taking immediate steps to address permitting and licensing issues, resolve grid connection delays and accelerate deployment of batteries and other energy storage technologies. Special efforts are needed to scale up financing for clean power in emerging market and developing economies outside China . Vital as solar PV and wind are, the deployment of a wide set of dispatchable low emissions sources, including hydropower, bioenergy and nuclear power, is essential for affordable and secure clean energy transitions. The NZE Scenario calls for about 1 000 TWh more hydro by 2035 than the STEPS does, and for about 650 TWh more bioenergy. While they are both mature technologies, their potential for growth is more limited than that of solar and wind, not least because of the limits on resource availability. There is also a gap of about 1 400 TWh between the NZE Scenario and the STEPS on nuclear power. This is significant, but much smaller than those for solar PV and wind: not all countries choose to use nuclear technology, and it involves relatively high initial costs and long construction times. If the power sector is to lead the way to net zero emissions, new low emissions options need to be brought to market by 2035. Small modular reactors are one of these technologies, and their development helps to accelerate the contribution of nuclear in the NZE Scenario. The deployment of carbon capture technologies and the use of low emissions hydrogen and ammonia are also important, since they can be used to reduce emissions from existing coalfired power plants which between them would use the entire remaining carbon budget to 1,5 °C if operated as they are today . By 2035, fossil fuels with CCUS and lowemissions hydrogen and ammonia start to make an impact in the NZE Scenario: together they deliver an additional 1 100 TWh over what is in the STEPS, setting them up to play an important part in decarbonising energy beyond 2035. There has been a major reorientation in natural gas trade routes since the cut in Russian pipeline exports to Europe. A large new wave of LNG export capacity is also set to come on line: if all projects that are under construction are completed on time, available liquefaction capacity is expected to rise globally from 580 bcm per year today to 850 bcm per year in 2030 .1 This increase in export capacity is larger than projected LNG demand growth in all three scenarios the result is an overhang of capacity which is set to depress international gas prices and set the stage for fierce competition between suppliers. On average, the delivered cost of LNG is around USD 4,50/MBtu, but costs vary widely. The most cost competitive sources of LNG are projects that have paid off their initial invested capital and that benefit from low cost feedgas and low operating costs, such as the Qatari LNG trains that started in the early 2000s. Around 40% of existing projects have yet to recover fully their invested capital, having been online for less than the typical ten year period over which debt is recovered in project finance for large scale LNG terminals. For projects under construction, average delivered costs are estimated to be around USD 8/MBtu, but there is a risk that this may increase due to mounting cost inflation amid a queue of projects. Indeed, delays or significant budget overruns have already affected around 20% of the projects that have made a final investment decision since 2019. In the STEPS, existing LNG export capacity and new capacity under construction are together sufficient to meet projected demand to 2040 . The utilisation rates of LNG plants average around 75% of nameplate capacity between 2025 and 2035 in the STEPS, which reflects very loose market conditions. After 2040, additional capacity is required as LNG demand continues to increase, and by 2050 the amount of additional capacity needed rises to around 180 bcm, most of which comes from the Middle East and North America. Ample LNG supply in the second half of the 2020s raises the question of whether demand might rise higher than projected in the STEPS. There is around 1 500 bcm of LNG import capacity around the world, and an additional 160 bcm is under construction. This suggests that there is sufficient infrastructure in place to handle additional LNG cargoes in most importing countries. As of mid 2024, around one third of export capacity under construction is as yet uncontracted, meaning these additional volumes will be made available on the spot market to buyers, who are likely to be interested if prices look competitive against incumbent fuels or technologies. There are many price sensitive markets in Asia, such as those for fertiliser in India or power generation in Pakistan, which in theory could ramp up LNG imports in response to lower prices. The problem for LNG suppliers is that, once all the costs of liquefaction, shipping and regasification are taken into account, it becomes a relatively expensive fuel, and a supplier could struggle to compete in emerging and developing markets while providing sufficient returns. For example, in countries such as India, imported gas prices would need to be around USD 3 5/MBtu to compete with coal, and prices in that range are likely to be below the delivered cost of LNG for many export projects around the world. In the STEPS, the degree of demand response to the LNG surplus is constrained by the projected scale of renewables deployment, a gradual reduction in the potential for increased coal to gas switching as coal plants retire, and faster efficiency gains and electrification rates than in the past. Moreover, the markets with ample infrastructure in place to receive additional LNG, notably Europe and China, are also those that are making the most rapid progress with energy transitions, reducing the likelihood that they will absorb major additional volumes of LNG. China in particular poses a conundrum: at around 8% in 2023, natural gas still accounts for a relatively small share of the overall energy mix, suggesting scope for expansion. But slowing economic growth sets the stage for intense competition in the domestic market, with coal being challenged by low emissions sources that are an increasingly important source of economic growth and employment. In today’s complicated geopolitical environment, with plenty of domestic coal and fast growing clean energy sources, it is not obvious that Chinese conditions will allow for rapid expansion of an imported fuel. It is worth noting in this context that the possibility, albeit still a distant one, of China concluding an additional gas supply contract with Russia for the Power of Siberia 2 pipeline represents a major wild card for the LNG industry, as this would significantly increase the global glut of LNG. Accelerated climate action – as seen in the APS and NZE Scenario – would also create an even larger surplus of LNG in the coming years. In the APS, LNG export plant utilisation rates fall to 70% in 2030, and existing LNG projects together with those under construction are able to fulfil LNG demand all the way through to 2050. In the NZE Scenario, utilisation rates fall to less than 60% in 2030 and LNG demand through to 2050 can be met entirely by projects existing today. In this latter scenario, we estimate that the sponsors of around 70% of LNG export projects currently under construction would struggle to recover their invested capital. Gas prices are higher in the APS, but there are still some 80 bcm of projects, or 30% of what is currently under construction, which would not fully recover their invested capital. Nonetheless, markets typically find ways to clear, and it is therefore worth examining the conditions under which natural gas demand growth could be more robust. The 2010s – heralded by the IEA in a 2011 report as a potential “golden age for gas” – saw natural gas demand grow on average by around 2,7% per year, and it has in addition increased by 1,2% per year on average over the past five years . In the STEPS, natural gas demand peaks before 2030 and declines throughout the 2030s, mainly due to the rapid deployment of renewables, heat pumps and other efficiency measures. But clean energy technologies could be adopted at a slower pace and scale than seen in the STEPS, and alongside other factors, this could lead to natural gas demand continuing to rise throughout the 2030s and beyond . Reaching universal access to electricity and clean cooking is central to a just, people centred energy transition. The deployment of ever more innovative, efficient and sustainable solutions has widened the range of options now available to achieve that goal while improving the quality of life of millions and reducing the impact on the environment. Since the early 2000s, many countries have made rapid progress to extend energy access, led by developing economies in Asia and parts of Latin America . Other countries, especially in sub Saharan Africa, have struggled to keep up with population growth. As part of the United Nations Sustainable Development Agenda, UN members in 2015 agreed to the goal of providing affordable, reliable and modern energy to all by 2030  – a goal that is achieved in the NZE Scenario. IEA tracking shows that, even before the Covid 19 pandemic and the global energy crisis, a major boost in progress was needed to deliver this goal. Recent years have seen progress slow and even go into reverse in some cases, intensifying the pressure on countries that were already facing a difficult outlook. This raises the question of whether the 2030 goal is slipping out of reach. Yet, there are reasons for guarded optimism. A range of innovative energy access solutions is renewing momentum and helping to bring about faster progress in some regions. In addition, a flurry of new policies and national plans have markedly improved the longer term outlook. This section explores how energy access progresses under current policy settings, and where accelerated action is needed. Progress on electricity access has been remarkable in the past decades: since 2000, the world has reduced the number of people without electricity access by 925 million, and 40 countries have reached at least near universal access to electricity. But around 750 million people still lack access to electricity, and progress has been uneven, with only one in five of the people gaining access to electricity in this period living in Africa. As many Asian countries near universal access, attention is increasingly turning to Africa, where it has proved more difficult to regain momentum amid the lingering effects of the crisis years, including high debt levels in many countries. While grid connections in some countries are gradually resuming, some of this slowdown is being offset by new business models such as Pay As You Go solar PV  and digital payment systems, and by the decreasing cost of batteries and solar PV modules. Sales of solar home systems  have increased 2,5 fold in sub Saharan Africa since 2018, and more than 90% of all the systems sold worldwide in 2023 were sold through PAYGo . The latest IEA estimates suggest that over 40 million people in sub Saharan Africa had access to electricity via SHS in 2023, which is almost four times more than five years before. An additional 30 million people in the region use SHS as a backup source of electricity, especially in places where the grid electricity supply tends to be unreliable. Innovative models like Energy as a Service are showing the potential to make SHS affordable even for the poorest and most remote populations . In addition, around 48 million people globally benefited from a mini grid connection in 2021, around 27 million of which are in subSaharan Africa . Recent analysis indicates that 2024 might be the fastest year on record for new mini grid connections . A crucial ingredient for successful projects is a link to local productive uses as they underpin revenue and bankability and can lead to significant local economic benefits in the longer term . While technological improvements and innovative models are helping, they will not by themselves achieve the scale needed to reach universal access and overcome the current affordability gap. Public interventions and targeted incentives are required if 120 million people are to gain access each year, as they must do to achieve the SDG 7,1 goal by 2030 . Most of the progress needs to take place in sub Saharan Africa, where around 7% of the population has to gain access each year to get on track. This pace of annual progress is not unprecedented, with comparable and higher percentages having been achieved in the past in Bangladesh, Kenya, Ghana, Rwanda and India. In 2018, India connected almost 100 million people – equivalent to the annual effort required in subSaharan Africa to close the gap by 2030 – thanks to government initiatives aimed at expanding rural electrification, such as the Saubhagya and the Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana schemes. Around one third of the population without access to electricity, about 250 million people, live in countries where new and improved access policies and programmes have been initiated, including six countries where previous policies were expected to lead to very limited improvements. New international financing commitments are helping draw policy attention to countries with large access gaps. However, there will still be around 650 million people without access to electricity by 2030 in the STEPS. More concrete measures are needed to boost progress. Since 2000, around 1 billion people have gained access to clean cooking, and 16 countries have reached near universal access. Progress has been concentrated in Asia and Latin America. In much of Africa, population growth has continued to outpace improvements in access. There is much further to go. Today, more than 2 billion people still lack access to clean cooking, split almost equally between sub Saharan Africa and developing economies in Asia. Among the main obstacles to further progress are affordability and limited clean cooking policies and programmes. Countries that have recently implemented or strengthened clean cooking policies have often seen rapid progress, particularly in urban and peri urban areas. The majority of progress so far has been achieved through the provision of LPG stoves and cylinders, and improved solid biomass stoves. Other clean cooking fuels are proving capable of being rapidly scaled up in certain locations, notably bioethanol, biogas and electric cooking. Bioethanol cooking has grown strongly on the back of carbon credit revenues in Kenya and has the potential to expand quickly in urban and peri urban areas in East Africa. Efficiency induction and hyper efficient electric pressure cookers are also starting to make headway in Asia, often supported by government led campaigns to reduce LPG imports. Access to clean cooking has gained substantial political attention in recent years, prompting a wave of new domestic and international efforts to improve access. Around 630 million people without clean cooking access live in countries in which new and improved policy frameworks were implemented in the last two years or are under active development . This includes new national clean cooking strategies and plans in Kenya, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda. Support from the G7, G20, and the Conference of the Parties  presidencies as well as from international finance institutions helped to move the dial. While this has improved the outlook for clean cooking since the WEO 2023, around 1,7 billion people still lack access to clean cooking by 2030 in the STEPS. Transitional solutions like improved biomass cookstoves  could provide prompt and meaningful benefits for remote and poor households in the short term before more sustainable longer term solutions and infrastructure can be put in place. To achieve universal energy access by 2030, around USD 55 billion in upfront investment is needed each year, around two thirds of which is required in sub Saharan Africa . This is less than 2% of current annual energy spending. Current investment levels are just below USD 10 billion annually. This is much less than is needed and has decreased around 75% from pre COVID19 levels. However, the decrease is due in part to large economies having made rapid progress in the intervening years and achieving near universal access to electricity. Affordability constraints mean that private capital can only cover a small share of the financing that is needed for energy access, while African governments already face rising debt sustainability concerns. This means that the allocation of official development assistance to energy in Africa is vitally important if faster progress is to be made, but the level of such assistance for energy projects has remained static over the past decade. Without a stronger international commitment to universal energy access, there is a risk that many developing economies may be left behind. The new collective quantified goal on climate finance could be used as a vehicle to close at least part of the funding gap. Renewed attention to energy access issues within international climate finance and development assistance is already providing a boost to concessional capital for access. The “Mission 300” programme, which aims to provide 300 million people with electricity access, has received initial pledges of USD 30 billion and aims to reach around USD 90 billion. An additional USD 2,2 billion of private and public sector finance for clean cooking was pledged at the IEA Summit for Clean Cooking in Africa in May 2024, on top of the USD 2 billion committed by the African Development Bank at the COP28. Implementing these commitments remains a challenge. The small size of projects, especially for clean cooking and rural off grid electrification, and the lack of established private sector players in some locations, make it more difficult to disburse money fast and effectively. On top of this, household affordability constraints, evolving pricing regulation and a lack of credible benchmarks increase the real and perceived risks for energy access projects. Plans to improve electricity access are more likely to attract support and to succeed if they identify productive uses and anchor loads, for example small industries, agricultural pumps, communication towers, and if they lead to the displacement of diesel and petrol generators. Targeting institutional facilities and peri urban areas has proved to be successful to extend access to clean cooking while creating momentum. Recent shifts in the use of concessional finance such as guarantees and first loss capital are helping to attract rising levels of private capital. The share of private finance in both electricity and clean cooking access projects neared 50% in 2019, up from 30% for electricity in 2013, and from less than 10% for clean cooking. The availability of commercial private capital is expected to continue to rise but is likely to focus on more profitable projects, such as those in urban and high demand areas. Public and concessional finance remains fundamental to reach poor and more remote areas. Carbon market financing for clean cooking projects has also been on the rise, with over 40 million credits issued in 2023, accounting for 15% of all carbon credits issued globally and up ten times from 2013. Concerns about the rigour of cookstoves credits have hampered the market, but new initiatives and methodologies, notably the CLEAR 2 methodology, aim to meet those concerns. Despite the progress that is being made, the goal of universal access cannot be delivered without improved policies and an increase in funding support, particularly in Africa. Calls for more climate finance need to be heeded, and to be accompanied by continued efforts to ramp up private sector involvement. All of this ultimately depends on unwavering commitment to achieve universal access on the part of the governments of the countries where progress is needed, together with strengthened commitment on the part of the international community, including international financial institutions. Global energy sector investment reached around USD 2,9 trillion in 2023 and is likely to exceed USD 3 trillion for the first time in 2024, with almost USD 2 invested in a range of clean energy technologies and infrastructure for every USD 1 spent on fossil fuels. Prior to the Covid 19 pandemic, this ratio was closer to 1:1. Global investment in clean energy has increased by 60% since 2015, driven not only by emissions reduction goals, but also by robust underlying economics, considerations of energy security during a period of extreme volatility in fossil fuel prices, and competition among leading economies for positions in the new clean energy economy that will be an important source of growth and employment in the coming years. Recent increases in clean energy investment come mostly from advanced economies and China, making up 85% of the total, while other emerging market and developing economies, home to two thirds of the global population, account for just 15% . This misalignment is a major concern, given that demand for energy services in developing economies will inevitably increase in the coming years to support rising standards of living, universal access to energy and construction of modern infrastructure. The high cost of capital and lack of affordable long term financing is a key contributor to these regional imbalances and an impediment to increasing capital flows to emerging market and developing economies in the future. Investment in clean energy projects increase in all parts of the world in the NZE Scenario, but the regional imbalances mean that the required increase is particularly steep in emerging market and developing economies other than China. In the NZE Scenario, annual spending on clean energy doubles in advanced economies and in China by 2035 compared with 2023 levels, while it grows more than six fold in other developing economies . The surge in clean energy spending that is required in both the APS and NZE scenario can appear daunting for emerging market and developing economies . But many examples show that a clear vision for energy transitions, supported by sound policies, regulations and private sector engagement, can drive growth in both the quantity and quality of clean energy investments. And the benefits of these investments go well beyond mitigating climate change . Many clean energy facilities, once installed, tend to have lower operating costs than fossil fuel facilities, and are not financially exposed to volatile fuel costs. This can bring major long term energy and economic security gains especially for economies highly dependent on fuel imports. Closing the clean energy investment gap in developing economies requires mobilising capital and channelling it to sectors that present different degrees and types of risks to investors. For instance, the challenges and business models that are relevant to a utility scale solar PV project with a long term contract are different from those that arise in connection with a transmission line financed on balance sheet by a state owned utility, or an electric car that is paid for by a household with consumer finance or their own savings. Risks can also vary for different projects within a single sector and for similar projects in different countries, since factors like political and macroeconomic stability and the rule of law have broad consequences for risk perceptions and therefore also for the cost of capital. The prospects for scaling up clean energy investment in all sectors depend to a large extent on policy certainty, data reliability and strong governance. Making improvements in these areas is therefore critically important. This needs to be accompanied and facilitated by significant increases in international public financial and technical support, including larger volumes of concessional funding to bring in much higher multiples of private capital. By 2030 in the NZE Scenario, annual concessional funding for the energy sector triples to reach over USD 100 billion in developing economies other than China. However, not all projects need public financial support. In considering how to scale up investment, it is useful to break down the overall requirement into categories that reflect particular characteristics and risk profiles. In work undertaken in support of the Brazilian G20 presidency in 2024, the following three groupings were proposed. The first group covers investment in mature clean energy technologies with relatively low risk and strong underlying economics in countries with relatively good credit rating. These can usually be privately led, provided that investors have confidence in the quality of the policy and regulatory environment. For example, utility scale solar PV and wind projects in Brazil or in India have built up a successful track record of mobilising private capital for several years, and only limited interventions are required on the financing side from the public sector. In the NZE Scenario, the total clean energy investment requirement in developing economies other than China in 2035 is around USD 1,8 trillion, and our assessment is that around 40% of the investment falls into this privately led category. The second group of projects, accounting for around half of the 2035 clean energy requirement in the NZE Scenario, needs to be facilitated by some form of risk mitigation based on collaboration between the public and private sectors. These facilitated interventions cover technologies that have reached commercial maturity in some markets but have yet to take off in a specific developing economy, for example a utilityscale solar PV in a nascent market like Cambodia, and emerging technologies in relatively low risk jurisdictions that require additional support for the first commercial scale projects, for example a low emissions hydrogen project in Chile. They also cover projects where the national creditworthiness is low and a constraint on investors, or where significant social returns, such as those arising from improved energy access, need some form of public support to ensure affordability and bankability. The third group, accounting for around 6% of projects, concerns investment for which commercial capital is either not available or is too costly to access because the real and perceived risks are very high. These investments need to be publicly driven. They include projects in some of the least developed countries in the world, and projects in countries involved in or emerging from conflicts, as well as those involving some nascent technologies or aspects of public infrastructure that require substantial public support to lower costs. These three categories help to differentiate the types and scale of finance that may be required to advance clean energy transitions in emerging market and developing economies, and to provide a means of identifying the cases that require additional support from public financial institutions, including the strategic use of concessional financing to bring in much larger volumes of private capital. Facilitated interventions need to be designed in ways that not only help individual projects to move ahead but also clear the path for more projects to follow without the same level of support. Concessional funding is scarce and needs to be deployed in ways that allow its impact to be sustained even when the funding itself is withdrawn. In essence this means helping projects to move to a point where they can be led by the private sector. The key to this is to consider reforms that address underlying barriers as part of the process of designing and implementing interventions, and to standardise, to the extent possible, the underlying documentation, for example for power purchase agreements. Scaling up clean energy requires integrated policy approaches and system wide planning. In the power sector, for example, bringing in new sources of generation, especially variable ones like solar PV and wind, requires the flexible operation of other generation assets and measures to expand and modernise grids and storage. In countries with large coal fired power generation fleets, this means repurposing coal plants to provide balancing services, or making provisions for early plant retirements to allow clean sources to expand, prioritising the retirement of older, less efficient units. It also means full recognition of the importance of demand side measures and energy efficiency. Scaling up also means identifying and developing new sources of finance. For the moment, domestic sources of capital account for most of the financing for clean energy investment projects in developing economies. This finding is heavily conditioned by the weight of China in the overall numbers, as more than 90% of clean energy projects in China are funded by domestic sources. But domestic funding has also been crucial in other developing economies that have successfully scaled up clean energy investment, including India and South Africa. Deeper local capital markets in other jurisdictions can help finance flow to projects in clean energy, while developing secondary markets from operating assets with stable revenue streams can also help recycle capital into new projects. The volume of investment required for successful clean energy transitions therefore necessitates a greater role for international capital. As an example, developing economies other than China see a sharp increase in capital flows from international sources, from 20% in 2023 to 35% in the NZE Scenario in 2035. Financing instruments such as green, social, sustainable and sustainability linked bonds have the potential to mobilise private capital at scale by attracting institutional investors that do not typically invest in individual projects. Project aggregation platforms and securitisation vehicles are also necessary to overcome the asymmetry between the relatively small size of most clean energy projects, especially in the end use sector, in developing economies and the comparatively large minimum investment size that institutional investors typically require. The World Energy Outlook 2024 unfolds against a complex and uncertain backdrop. The immediate impact of the shocks from the Covid 19 pandemic and the global energy crisis spurred by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine are diminishing, but the damage to public finances and to international co operation will take longer to repair. Countries representing half of global energy demand are voting in national or regional elections in 2024 climate and energy related issues feature prominently in many campaigns. The spectre of spiralling conflicts across the Middle East also highlights key energy security risks in the current system, while decades of accumulated emissions are accentuating the risks from extreme weather. Today’s broad trends underscore the urgency of transforming the energy sector even as they also complicate its achievement in practice. In these circumstances, the continued momentum and resilience of clean energy transitions is remarkable. Since 2020, investment in clean energy technologies and infrastructure has increased by 60% the amount of capital invested each year to support clean energy projects is now twice the amount invested in fossil fuels. This is boosting the contribution that clean energy makes to the global energy mix, even though the majority of growth in global energy demand is currently still being met by fossil fuels. The extent and speed of structural changes in the energy sector and their implications for energy security, affordability and emissions are central themes in this Outlook. Our scenario analysis is designed to inform decision makers as they consider options, not to predict how they will act, and none of the scenarios should be viewed as a forecast. The scenarios, all of which look out to 2050, are Stated Policies Scenario provides a sense of the prevailing direction of travel for the energy system, based on a detailed assessment of current policy settings. Chapter 4 explores a number of sensitivity cases related to clean energy deployment, natural gas markets and electricity demand, and to assess the wider implications these have for energy and emissions. Announced Pledges Scenario outlines a trajectory for the energy sector if all national energy and climate pledges, including long term net zero emissions goals, are met on time and in full. Net Zero Emissions by 2050  Scenario portrays a pathway in which the energy sector achieves net zero carbon dioxide  emissions globally by 2050, in line with limiting the long term global average temperature to 1,5 degrees Celsius , along with achieving universal energy access by 2030 and air quality objectives. This chapter sets the scene for subsequent analyses by outlining the current context for energy use and emissions, broad macroeconomic and investment trends, and policy and geopolitical uncertainties. It then goes into more detail on the scenarios used in this Outlook, discussing how and why they differ from each other, the underlying policy, economic and demographic drivers, energy and carbon prices, and technology costs. Following an increase of 8 exajoules  in 2022, global energy demand increased by around 13 EJ in 2023, pushing up global demand by 2%. This reflects a growing requirement for energy in emerging market and developing economies which more than cancelled out a fall in energy demand in advanced economies of around 2%. There was a large increase in both oil and coal use globally, and two thirds of the total increase in energy demand in 2023 was met by fossil fuels . Global oil demand increased by 2 million barrels per day  in 2023 to 99 mb/d. This increase was nearly double the average annual increase between 2010 and 2019 and was led by increases in oil use as a petrochemical feedstock in China – where total oil demand increased by 1,5 mb/d – and by continued global growth in oil demand in the transport sector. Demand in advanced economies fell by around 0,3 mb/d. Oil demand trends in 2024 show a sharp slowdown in demand growth, notably in China, which is expected to result in an overall rise for the year of less than 1 mb/d. Global coal demand increased by just over 100 million tonnes of coal equivalent  in 2023 to around 6 000 Mtce, mainly because of increased use in the power sector in China and India. Demand in advanced economies fell by more than 120 Mtce, about 10%, with coal use in the United States and European Union power sectors dropping by 20 25%. Demand in 2024 is expected to be slightly higher than in 2023 as strong electricity demand in China and India result in higher coal demand that more than offsets continued cuts in coal use in the European Union. Natural gas demand worldwide rose by 20 billion cubic metres  in 2023 to 4 190 bcm. There were large increases in demand in the power sector in North America and in the buildings and industry sectors in the Middle East. These were partially offset by a 40 bcm decline in Europe, which reduced its natural gas demand by around 7% in 2023. This follows a reduction of 13% in 2022 and means that gas demand in Europe is now at its lowest level since the early 1990s. Preliminary data suggest that global natural gas demand increased by 50 bcm in the first half of 2024, mainly as a result of increases in natural gas use in the industry and power sectors in Asia. Total energy supply from low emissions sources of energy reached a record high in 2023, led by increases in China and Europe. In the electricity sector, more than 560 gigawatts  of new renewable power capacity were added in 2023, accounting for around 80% of total new power sector capacity additions worldwide. China alone added more than 350 GW of new renewables capacity, and its renewable generation increased by 235 terawatt hours , which is similar to the total amount of renewable electricity generated in Japan in 2023. Liquid biofuels supply increased by 7% in 2023 to 2,3 million barrels of oil equivalent per day , mainly because of new renewable diesel refining capacity in the United States and new bioethanol capacity in Brazil. The supply of biomethane, an upgraded form of biogas, rose by 10% in 2023 to around 10 bcm reflecting enhanced policy support in Europe and the United States. Nuclear generation rose by 3%, in large part due to the restart of some existing reactors in Japan. The energy intensity of the global economy improved by around 1% in 2023, following a 2% decline in 2022, meaning that the efficiency with which the global economy uses energy is continuing to make progress. In the European Union, energy intensity improved by 5% in 2023 as measures put in place to tackle the energy crisis continued to drive down energy use and as energy intensive industrial output declined. Globally, the share of total car sales accounted for by plug in hybrid and battery electric models rose from 14% in 2022 to 18% in 2023 and is set to rise above 20% in 2024. Around 60% of all electric car sales in 2023 were in China. The number of heat pumps installed around the world fell slightly in 2023 as concerns around high natural gas prices eased and consumers continued to face harsh economic conditions. The energy sector is responsible for around 85% of total global CO2 emissions energy related CO2 emissions rose by 1,3% in 2023 to a record high of 37,7 gigatonnes  . Emissions from coal drove most of the increase. Energy related CO2 emissions were about 1 Gt higher in 2023 than in 2019. The world has clearly not yet turned the corner on emissions. Nevertheless, the clean energy economy is having an effect: the increase in emissions since 2019 would have been three times as large without the expanding deployment of clean energy technologies . The hottest year in recorded history was 2023. Temperatures by mid 2024 suggest that this record is highly likely to be broken again. The 12 month period to May 2024 saw 76 extreme heat events worldwide, with damaging consequences for infrastructure, healthcare services, vulnerable populations and the natural environment . Although it is not yet possible to be certain, the 12 month period from July 2023 to June 2024 may have seen global average surface temperatures of 1,5 °C higher than pre industrial levels , and the World Meteorological Organization  declared an approximately 50% chance that the temperature rise will exceed 1,5 °C on average over the 2024 2028 period . The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  warns that the severity of the impacts of global warming are expected to escalate dramatically if the temperature rise does go above 1,5 °C. However, the 1,5 °C threshold, as set out in the Paris Agreement, applies to long term warming, rather than single year or short term periods, which are strongly affected by natural weather variability. The IPCC often uses an averaging period of 20 years to remove the impact of natural variability when considering whether a given warming level has been crossed. Even if the temperature rise exceeds 1,5 °C for a short period, the temperature rise can be brought back below 1,5 °C with concerted long term action . Following a prolonged period of exceptionally low interest rates and inflation in the 2010s, the macroeconomic context was significantly changed in the space of a few years by the Covid 19 pandemic and the global energy crisis triggered by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. To combat the rising inflation that emerged as the landscape changed, central banks progressively tightened their monetary policy, which led to the steepest interest rate increases seen in decades. Advanced economies raised rates by an average of 290 basis points  in 2023 over the average level in 2022 and emerging market and developing economies by 150 basis points . Inflation has eased in most regions so far in 2024 and there have been interest rates cuts in a number of countries, particularly in advanced economies. However, inflation and interest rates currently are still much higher than they have been over the past 15 years in most economies. Inflation remains a particular problem in a number of emerging market and developing economies, including Brazil, India and South Africa, and interest rate cuts there are likely to be slower. The energy crisis clearly showed the role that energy prices can play in inflation, with price spikes contributing approximately one third of the increase in headline inflation between 2021 2023 . The driver was not clean energy it was spikes in the prices of oil, natural gas and coal after the Russian invasion of Ukraine and cuts in Russian gas supply to Europe . Increases in energy prices, whether from temporary spikes or more structural changes, have a major impact on household bills. In both advanced and emerging market and developing economies, the median household spends around 10% of their disposable income on residential energy and transport fuels. Direct consumption of oil, electricity and gas in emerging market and developing economies is only one third of the level in advanced economies, but disposable income is also much lower. Oil currently accounts for around half of total consumer energy expenditure worldwide, meaning that oil price volatility has a particularly significant impact on consumer energy expenditure. There are several near term downside risks for global economic growth. In 2024 and 2025 growth is expected to be lower than the 2010 2019 average in countries comprising more than 80% of global output and population . High debt levels and interest rates in many economies are likely to squeeze government spending, potentially delaying or decreasing investment in energy infrastructure. They are also likely to reduce household spending, which could lead to a slowdown of the economy and higher unemployment. Further macroeconomic risks include trade fragmentation as well as geopolitical and policy uncertainty . The economic slowdown is pronounced in emerging market and developing economies: nearly 60% of the growth forecasts for these economies made by the International Monetary Fund  in April 2024 are lower than the forecasts made in April 2023  and their aggregate rate of economic growth is expected to slow from 4,2% in 2023 to 4% in 2024 . Per capita income growth is set to average just 3% through to 2026, below the 2010 2019 average of 3,3%, and many emerging market and developing economies are now unlikely to see any relative economic catch up with advanced economies in the near term. This slowdown puts recent progress on poverty reduction at risk of stalling or reversing. These imbalances are also reflected in flows of capital to clean energy projects . Global clean energy investment has increased rapidly over the last five years, but nearly all of the increase has been in advanced economies and China, with China accounting for an especially large share of spending relative to its gross domestic product . Increasing capital flows to clean energy projects in other emerging market and developing economies will be essential to meet their rapidly rising demand for energy services in a sustainable way and to support economic growth. However, involvement of private capital in many of these countries is still limited and faces a variety of headwinds. The higher interest rate environment has pushed up financing costs, and expected levels of returns on investment are impacted by higher real and perceived risks of new clean energy projects in these markets. A major reason for the uncertain political context is the large number of elections that have been or are being held in 2024 around the world, which affect the population in over 80 countries that account for half of global energy demand . The global energy crisis put energy and other pressures on the cost of living at the heart of many voter concerns. The prominence of energy related issues in many campaigns suggests that elections could bring some changes in emphasis and direction for energy policies. In some cases, these could reinforce the momentum behind clean energy transitions in others, they could lead to a slower pace of change. In the meantime, uncertainty may deter energy investment, particularly in large scale projects in new or emerging technologies that are particularly sensitive to policy and regulatory changes . Energy markets also remain vulnerable to geopolitical events. The initial price shocks from the global energy crisis and the Russian invasion of Ukraine abated during the first quarter of 2024 as natural gas prices dropped to slightly above pre crisis levels, though prices remain above their 2023 levels across the main Asian and European markets due to a combination of robust demand and short term constraints on liquefied natural gas  supply. Further shocks arising from the continuing war in Ukraine cannot be ruled out. There are other geopolitical tensions that could trigger disruption and price shocks in energy markets. There are particularly high risks in the Middle East with the spectre of spiralling regional hostilities, as well as attacks on shipping in the Red Sea. Since 2021, Europe, Japan and Korea have taken an increased share of their oil imports from the Middle East in the wake of sanctions imposed on Russia, and China has seen a similar trend . Imports of Russian oil to India increased from 2% of total oil imports in 2021 to 35% in 2023. For the moment, these geopolitical risks have not been reflected in prices, but a broader regional conflict could have major implications for oil and natural gas markets. More than 20 mb/d of oil passes through the Strait of Hormuz, 75% of which goes to Asia, and a further 7,5 mb/d of oil passes through the Suez Canal. Annual flows of LNG through the Strait of Hormuz are more than 100 bcm, nearly 80% of which is delivered to Asian markets. Clean energy supply chains are also subject to geopolitical tensions. At present, China produces more than 80% of the world’s battery cells and solar photovoltaic  modules, and 65% of wind nacelles . It dominates the midstream refining and processing of critical minerals, accounting for 65% of global processing for lithium and over 75% for cobalt and nearly all the graphite anode supply chain. China currently produces two thirds of the world's electric vehicles . Investment in these areas has picked up in the United States, European Union, India and elsewhere, and China’s share in global EV sales slipped from 70% in 2022 to 65% in 2023, but it is still very large. Consumers around the world have benefited from the reductions in technology costs that large scale supply chain investment has brought. Nonetheless, such a high degree of concentration presents risks. If disruptions were to occur, the nature and severity of its effects might well depend on whether it resulted from geopolitical issues, extreme weather or industrial accidents. Many countries are seeking to promote more diverse patterns of investment and manufacturing in clean energy supply, including for critical minerals. This has resulted in a marked increase in the number of trade policies and other measures focussed on clean energy technologies since 2020. Tariff adjustments, antidumping duties and countervailing measures are at the centre of the most recent trade policies. For example, several regions, such as the United States and European Union, have announced additional duties on solar PV, EVs and batteries from China. There have also been revisions to import tariffs on some clean energy technologies and components in Brazil, Canada, China, Egypt, India, Mexico, Türkiye and United States. While these could lead to more diversified supplies, a balance is required that also recognises the value of clean energy equipment and mineral trade to clean energy transitions. The World Energy Outlook  analyses provide a framework for understanding the future of energy by examining different potential scenarios for its development. Each scenario has the same starting point and incorporates the latest data for energy supply and demand, markets, technology costs and policies, and also similar levels of future population and economic growth. None of these scenarios is a forecast. The energy system described in each scenario evolves in a distinctive pathway that delivers energy services with a different mix of technologies and fuels, and with varying implications for energy security, affordability and emissions. This is mainly due to variations in the assumptions made about how government policies develop, and how these variations affect the investment and technology choices made by households and firms. Stated Policies Scenario provides a sense of the prevailing direction of travel for the energy sector based on a detailed reading of the latest policy settings in countries around the world. It accounts for energy, climate and related industrial policies that are in place or that have been announced. The aims of these policies are not automatically assumed to be met they are incorporated in the scenario only to the extent that they are underpinned by adequate provisions for their implementation. Each year many countries add new policies and some abandon existing ones. Each annual iteration of the STEPS takes account of these changes. This version is no exception. The STEPS is associated with a temperature rise of 2,4 °C in 2100 . Announced Pledges Scenario starts from the same detailed reading of government policies but takes a different view on their implementation. The key difference is that this scenario assumes that all national energy and climate targets, including longer term net zero emissions targets and pledges in Nationally Determined Contributions, are met in full and on time. This is a strong assumption, given that most governments are still far from having policies in place to deliver their long term pledges. Even those countries without long term energy or emissions goals follow a different path than in the STEPS because their investment choices are shaped by and benefit from steeper cost reductions for a range of clean energy technologies made possible by the actions of other countries. The APS is associated with a temperature rise of 1,7 °C in 2100 . Net Zero Emissions by 2050  Scenario portrays a pathway for the global energy sector to achieve net zero CO2 emissions by 2050 which is consistent with limiting long term global warming to 1,5 °C with limited overshoot . The NZE Scenario also meets the key energy related UN Sustainable Development Goals, in particular by achieving universal access to modern energy services by 2030 and securing major improvements in air quality. Even though the global rise in temperature is already approaching or even exceeding the 1,5 °C limit in individual years, this does not mean that the target itself is out of reach. But every year in which global emissions rise and actions fall short of what is needed for the future makes this pathway steeper and harder to climb. The NZE Scenario is a normative scenario in that it works backwards from a defined outcome. The Stated Policies and Announced Pledges scenarios are exploratory, in that they do not target a specific outcome but rather establish different sets of starting conditions and consider where they may lead. The main scenarios in this Outlook are accompanied by a number of sensitivity cases. These are built around the STEPS and look at some of the most pertinent and topical dynamics affecting the energy sector and how these impact future energy demand and emissions levels . The sensitivity cases explored include: the pace at which consumers choose to purchase electric cars future deployment of renewables in the power sector uncertainties related to natural gas demand in the light of the new LNG supply that is set to come online uncertainties about future electricity demand, particularly related to how much electricity data centres will use and how far the efficiency of end use appliances will improve. A crucial part of each annual edition of the World Energy Outlook is an in depth country by country review of government policies, regulatory measures, targets and announcements that could affect the way that the energy sector evolves. The modelling and analysis incorporate measures relating to fuel and power supply, end use sectors, that is transport, buildings and industry, shortand long term climate pledges, sustainable development objectives and energy access goals, and industrial and trade policies related to the energy sector. The policies that are considered in the STEPS and the APS are highlighted in Annex B. There have been many new energy and climate initiatives since the WEO 2023, including policy announcements, investment plans and regulations. Some examples of the sorts of policies that were considered when developing the STEPS for 2024 include:  Argentina passed major free market reforms designed to stimulate investment in new oil and gas infrastructure.  Australia adopted its first New Vehicle Efficiency Standard, which will apply to new cars sold from 2025.  Australia, Indonesia, Japan and Korea all passed legislation designed to advance the development of new projects for carbon capture, utilisation and storage.  Canada adopted a new Green Buildings Strategy to accelerate retrofits by providing financial support of close to CAD 1 billion in its 2024 budget.  China’s Ministry of Ecology and Environment issued a new Air Quality Improvement Policy targeting a reduction in the density of particulate emissions and in the number of severe pollution incidents.  The European Union adopted its first ever regulation on reducing methane emissions. The EU Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism started its first transitional phase of operation, introducing a reporting requirement for importers of cement, iron and steel, aluminium, fertilisers, electricity and hydrogen.  Indonesia’s Comprehensive Investment and Policy Plan was finalised as part of the Just Energy Transition Partnership.  Korea confirmed its 11th Basic Electricity Supply and Demand Plan, a 15 year blueprint for electricity supply and demand that includes a significant expansion of nuclear, wind and solar power.  South Africa released a draft Gas Master Plan for public comment.  A new government in the United Kingdom lifted the de facto ban on new onshore wind development.  The United States Environmental Protection Agency released new regulations on greenhouse gas standards and guidelines for fossil fuel fired power plants, along with multi pollutant emissions standards for cars and trucks.  New sanctions on Russian LNG developments and trade were announced by the United States and the European Union.  The United States Federal Energy Regulatory Commission adopted Order no. 1920, that requires transmission providers to conduct long term planning for regional transmission facilities and to determine how to pay for them.  Viet Nam adopted an implementation plan for its National Power Development Master Plan for the 2021 to 2030 period, and also approved a new mechanism to allow renewable project developers to sell electricity directly to large consumers. Since the WEO 2023, 38 countries, responsible for one third of energy related CO2 emissions, have implemented new government spending measures for clean energy technologies. Around 35 countries, responsible for 20% of global emissions, have adopted new or updated energy related regulations . There have also been some rollbacks and postponements of previous policies, although the impact of these remains relatively small. The first global stocktake at COP28 in Dubai in 2023 agreed on a notable set of new policyrelevant considerations for the energy sector. It includes – for the first time – a call to “accelerate global efforts towards net zero emissions energy systems utilising zeroand lowcarbon fuels well before or by around mid century” and a call to “transition away from fossil fuels in a just, orderly and equitable manner” . The COP28 outcome also set out some of the actions in the energy sector needed to achieve these goals, many of which were based on the NZE Scenario. They include: aims to triple global renewable energy capacity by 2030 double the rate energy efficiency improvement by 2030 accelerate efforts to phase down unabated coal fired power substantially reduce methane emissions and to phase out as soon as possible inefficient fossil fuel subsidies that do not address energy poverty or just transitions. The objectives agreed at COP28 are not incorporated into the design of the STEPS or the APS. The IEA tracks government support for energy investment, looking at licensing regimes, major project approvals and large infrastructure developments as well as direct support and tax credit provisions. Specific government support for clean energy investment was incorporated in a number of government recovery plans made in response to the Covid 19 pandemic and the global energy crisis. Announcements of government support for clean energy investment since 2020 cumulatively reached USD 2 trillion in the first half of 2024 . More than 40% of these announcements were made in 2022, and many stemmed from the US Inflation Reduction Act and other responses to the energy crisis in that year. Governments also spent heavily on short term consumer energy affordability during the global energy crisis – cumulatively around USD 940 billion – with the aim of helping to shield consumers and industries from very high energy prices. These measures have now mostly been rolled back. Recent years have seen countries place more focus on bolstering domestic manufacturing, with a particular interest in clean technology sectors . For example, both the US Inflation Reduction Act and the EU Net Zero Industry Act marked a reorientation of industrial policies towards incentives for domestic manufacturing. Around 10% of the USD 2 trillion explicitly earmarked globally for direct clean energy investment support since 2020 comes with conditions that require local content in one way or another, for example by specifying minimum levels of local labour, domestically sourced materials and components, or by requiring the building of specialised factories in the country concerned . New project announcements for manufacturing capacity are taken into account when considering technology choices in all the WEO scenarios. Governments employ measures other than direct production incentives to support domestic manufacturers, and not all appear directly on their fiscal balance sheets. Such support includes capital injections from state owned entities, below market rate lending and energy prices, preferential terms to access infrastructure and services, and allowances such as for land. Firms in countries with a large number of major state owned enterprises sometimes receive disproportionately more support overall than firms based in other jurisdictions. For example, grants and below market borrowing account for an estimated 3% of the revenues of firms based in China, compared with less than 0,1% in advanced economies . The STEPS is not a normative scenario: it does not assume an inevitable shift over time towards stronger action on emissions reductions. It simply maps out the implications of the prevailing policy settings, whatever they might be. Policy settings can and do change from year to year, and any such policy changes are incorporated into successive editions of the STEPS. Some changes roll back commitments to emissions reductions or clean energy deployment. This applies both to sustainability targets and the enabling measures that are designed to reach them. In some cases, these changes happen because ambitions were set at a level that now appears to be unrealistic. In 2019, for example, the administration in Scotland committed itself to a 75% reduction in greenhouse gas  emissions by 2030 from their 1990 level. This target is now set to be dropped. At corporate level, there are many examples of firms adjusting their near term targets, usually making them less stringent, in response to unfavourable market conditions, doubts surrounding government policy, or a realisation that achieving targets would be more difficult than initially assumed. In other cases, decision makers have argued that too much emphasis was being placed on energy transition measures at the expense of other goals, including those related to energy security and affordability, and changes in response to this sometimes mean longer timelines for introducing new technologies, or reduced incentives and policy support for their deployment. The effects of such changes will vary by country and technology: supportive policies are important, but they are not the only driver of change . In a year of elections around the world, there is even more uncertainty than usual over the future evolution of energy and climate policies. In all cases, we will continue to track policies and their implementation very closely in the WEO and provide a neutral and dispassionate assessment of what they mean for the future of energy, as well as their implications for energy security, affordability and emissions. The global economy is assumed to grow on average by 2,7% each year to 2050 in all three scenarios . This growth rate varies by country, region and over time, influenced by factors such as investment dynamics, employment rates and shifts in trade. We recognise that the speed, structure, and selection of policy and regulatory mechanisms driving changes in the energy system will have broader economic effects, both positive and negative, across various countries and regions. However, we maintain a constant economic growth rate across scenarios to facilitate a comparison of the impacts of different energy and climate choices with a consistent backdrop. The global population is assumed to expand from 8 billion people in 2023 to 9,7 billion in 2050, based on the median population projection of the United Nations. This represents an annual average growth rate of around 0,7%, which is around half the average annual growth rate seen between 1990 and 2023. Fertility rates have fallen in many parts of the world, and projections of the world’s population in 2100 are now 700 million lower than they were ten years ago . Population increases to 2050 in countries in sub Saharan Africa account for more than half of the overall increase at the world level, and increases in India, Pakistan and Bangladesh for a further 20%. Urban populations bulge in all regions, while rural populations decline in all regions other than Africa . Oil prices in our scenarios act as intermediaries to balance global supply and demand, ensuring markets remain in equilibrium. They are assumed to follow smooth trajectories in all scenarios despite the ever present risk of volatility. The STEPS sees near term downward pressure on prices, which remain below 2023 levels all the way through to 2050 as noted, much depends on the investment and market management strategies followed by major producers . In the APS, stringent policy measures lead to a stronger decline in demand and the oil price falls to USD 58/barrel in 2050. In the NZE Scenario, there is a sharp decline in the oil price to 2030 as a marked decrease in demand means that the price is set by the operating costs of the marginal producer, and by 2050 prices fall to around USD 25/barrel. In the APS and NZE scenarios, policies are sufficiently strong to counteract any effect of lower prices on demand that could jeopardise climate goals . The production plans and resilience of major resource holders strongly influence prices in our scenarios. In the STEPS and APS, continued market management by major producers is assumed to keep prices at higher levels than implied by the global supply cost curve. In the NZE Scenario, producer economies may struggle to manage strains placed on their fiscal balances from reductions in oil and gas income, and this could lead to higher and more volatile prices. Natural gas markets gradually rebalanced in 2023 as a result of timely policy actions in response to the global energy crisis, increased global LNG exports, and favourable weather conditions. In the STEPS, the US natural gas price rises to 2030 to ensure a smooth balance between domestic supply, demand and exports. In parallel, global gas trade continues to pivot toward LNG, and portfolio players act as important intermediaries between supply and demand. The large number of new LNG liquefaction facilities coming online over the period to 2030 leads to supply capacity in excess of global LNG demand. Prices in 2030 in Europe, Japan and China fall to levels substantially lower than those seen in 2023, as rapid growth in renewables and electrification limits the potential for a robust demand response to ample LNG supply. For LNG projects under construction, average delivered costs are estimated to be around USD 8 per million British thermal units , and so some LNG investors may struggle to recoup their invested capital within an acceptable timeframe. Natural gas prices gradually increase around the world after 2030 as the overhang in LNG is worked off. In the APS and the NZE Scenario, demand and prices are much lower around the world. Coal Global coal consumption reached a record high in 2023, but coal prices fell from the unprecedented highs reached in many regions in 2022. Prices further decline through to 2050 in all three scenarios. In the STEPS, there is a need to maintain existing mines and open some new mines as demand falls steadily, but prices still fall by around 30 50% to 2030 in importing regions. In the APS, a faster decline in demand allows for the closure of some high cost mines, leading to a deeper fall in prices. In the NZE Scenario, only the lowest cost mines are needed, and prices drop to very low levels. Higher than expected growth in coal consumption in China or India, as well as unfavourable conditions for renewable energy production, for example low precipitation, light winds, could pose upside risks to coal prices. Conversely, the development of new coal mines could weigh on prices if coal fired power plants face tougher competition from solar power. We do not yet model full long term supply demand balances for critical minerals in the same way as for fuels, but we do undertake market monitoring and scenario benchmarking. The prices of many critical minerals – particularly for batteries – fell in 2023 after two years of dramatic increases. Lithium spot prices fell by 75% and other key materials such as nickel, cobalt, manganese and graphite saw price drops of 30 45%. However, copper prices remained at elevated levels, and with the exception of cobalt and graphite, the prices of most critical minerals are higher than the average levels seen in the 2010s. The drop in critical mineral prices stemmed mainly from a rapid ramp up in supply in 2023. A number of new projects came online relatively quickly, adding sizeable volumes to the supply pool, and the ramp up of new supply has outpaced demand growth over the past two years. An inventory overhang in the downstream battery sector also played a role. Price declines helped reduce the cost of clean technologies, but also caused financial difficulties for some existing and planned supply projects. Today, just under one quarter of global GHG emissions are covered by a carbon price of some type through carbon taxes and/or emissions trading systems. Aggregate revenues from carbon pricing initiatives rose to more than USD 100 billion in 2023, a record high. Half of these revenues were generated by the European Union Emissions Trading Scheme . The STEPS incorporates existing and scheduled carbon pricing initiatives, with market based initiatives rising continuously and carbon taxes and other non market mechanisms remaining constant unless scheduled to increase. It sees the EU ETS CO2 price for power generation rise to just under USD 160/tonne CO2 in 2050. In the APS, net zero emissions pledges lead to higher CO2 prices across all regions, with prices rising by 2050 to USD 200/tonne CO2 on average in advanced economies, and to USD 160/tonne CO2 in China, India and Indonesia. In the NZE Scenario, carbon prices are introduced in all regions and cover most sectors: they rise to USD 250/tonne CO2 in 2050 in advanced economies and USD 200/tonne CO2 in major economies including China, Brazil, India and South Africa, with lower price levels elsewhere . As with other policy measures, carbon prices are assumed to be introduced with careful consideration of the consequences for tax burdens and the potential for negative distributional impacts. The level of carbon prices included in our scenarios should be interpreted with caution: the scenarios include several other energy policies and accompanying measures designed to reduce CO2 emissions, and this means that the carbon prices shown do not necessarily reflect the marginal costs of abatement. There is a large difference between wholesale prices for fuels and the retail prices paid by consumers. Retail prices reflect the cost of producing fuels that end users need and the cost of delivering them: they commonly include the costs of transport, refining, marketing and distribution, as well as customs duties, excise taxes, value added taxes and subsidies, all of which vary between, and sometimes within, countries. Retail prices are generally higher than wholesale prices, and sometimes much higher. For example, the average retail price of gasoline in Europe is around two and ahalf times the wholesale price of oil, with taxes accounting for around half of the retail price paid by consumers. Conversely, in the Middle East, subsidies mean the retail price for gasoline is on average lower than the wholesale price . Assumptions about the phase out of fossil fuel consumption subsidies vary by scenario: in the STEPS, for example, they are only removed if there is a specific commitment to do so. Retail prices and wholesale prices do not always move in tandem. For example, the average wholesale natural gas price in Europe fell by two thirds in 2023, while the average retail price increased by 14% as measures introduced by governments to keep retail prices from rising significantly during the global energy crisis came to an end in many countries. Retail electricity prices tend to be less volatile than other retail fuel prices because around half of electricity demand globally is in markets with regulated prices based on average costs. Supply chain pressures and higher critical minerals prices pushed up the cost of a number of key clean energy technologies in 2021 and 2022 . These pressures eased in 2023, and costs in most cases started to fall back. The IEA Clean Energy Equipment Price Index tracks price movements in a global basket of solar PV modules, wind turbines and lithium ion batteries for EVs and battery storage, weighted by shares of investment. Costs for most clean energy technologies have resumed a downward path and the fourth quarter of 2023 saw the index falling to its lowest ever level. The drop in critical mineral prices in 2023 led to a 10% reduction in that industry’s revenue and a 34% fall in operating profits. Lower prices may stimulate an acceleration in clean energy technology deployment in the medium term, but they could lead to longer term risks if they constrain investment and the critical mineral industry's ability to develop new supply projects. Given the importance of critical minerals to the cost of clean energy technologies and expected demand growth in the use of clean technologies, reduced investment could lead to future supply shortages and price spikes. This could slow reductions in clean energy technology costs, or even increase them, as happened in 2022 with battery pack prices, potentially hindering clean energy technology deployment. In the IEA Global Energy and Climate Model, the future evolution of technology costs depends on continued research, improvements in manufacturing and learning by doing. These costs are linked to levels of deployment and vary by scenario. They do not follow a linear path. A typical curve has the steepest rate of cost reduction in the earliest phases of innovation and deployment, when overall costs are still high: costs then fall more slowly as technologies mature. Policies play a crucial role in this process, particularly in determining how quickly new clean technologies are scaled up in sectors such as shipping, aviation and heavy industry. The recent evolution of upstream oil and gas costs also shows short term fluctuations. The IEA Upstream Oil and Gas Capital Cost Index, which tracks how the capital costs of a set of representative upstream oil and gas projects around the world evolve over time, rose by close to 7% in 2022 as a result of higher raw material prices and constrained markets for services and labour. Costs fell slightly in 2023 as inflation eased, but the drop was smaller than seen in batteries and solar PV. Upstream costs in 2023, however, were still nearly 15% below 2014 levels following extensive efforts by operators in recent years to downsize and simplify project designs to maintain competitiveness. Solar PV module prices fell by 30% in 2023. A recent surge in solar production capacity in China is decreasing margins for solar PV manufacturers setting the stage for a possible market consolidation among manufacturers in the near term. Chinese exports of solar cells and modules reached 255 GW in 2023, triple the 2019 level. Battery pack prices dropped by 14% in 2023 to a record low of USD 139 per kilowatt hour  following reductions in battery critical mineral prices and a surge in battery cell production capacity . Since 2013, battery pack costs have fallen almost sixfold due to economies of scale and manufacturing optimisation. However, the proportion of costs accounted for by the cost of cathode raw materials in the battery pack price has been rising. Around 30% of the cost of a battery pack now depends on the cost of critical minerals, and battery costs are increasingly susceptible to mineral price volatility. Material substitution can mitigate price volatility to an extent, as it did when lithium iron phosphate battery chemistry displaced nickel rich battery chemistries during the recent years of high nickel and cobalt prices. However, there is no alternative at present for some of the critical minerals used for particular functions in battery packs, including copper in the current collector in lithium ion battery anodes and graphite in lithium ion batteries. Manufacturing costs for wind turbines rose in second quarter 2023 as a result of an increase in steel and freight costs. Companies in China have so far proven able to produce wind turbines at lower cost than their European counterparts. However, this has not translated into a large increase in exports due in large part to the costs and logistical complexities of moving large wind turbines very long distances. Offshore wind has higher upfront costs than onshore wind and solar PV. In 2023, developers struggled with project profitability due to inflation, high interest rates and supply chain challenges in connection with large turbine manufacturing and installation. Several contracts were cancelled because previously agreed prices became unviable. As ever, governments will need to pay close attention to market and cost dynamics as they design policies and support schemes for emerging technologies. Tensions in global energy markets calmed to a degree in 2023, and global energy demand rebounded by 2,1%, which means that the rate of growth was above its average rate from 2000 to 2019. Population growth and rising incomes continued to spur higher consumer demand for energy services, and patterns of demand continued to evolve, with data centres and artificial intelligence requiring increasing amounts of energy, for example. This is the starting point for our modelling process in this World Energy Outlook . The first step in producing our scenario projections is not to look at emissions, investment or resources, but to look in detail at demand for energy services. In other words, we look first at how much light, heat, mobility and information services communities, industries and countries around the world are likely to need over the decades to 2050. Government policies lay the foundation, and over 5 000 policies in countries around the world have been collected, documented and analysed by technology and sector. Levels of energy services demand increase at broadly the same rate in each of our scenarios as the global economy grows, with two important exceptions. The first concerns progress towards universal access to modern energy: this varies by scenario, which affects the level of demand for energy services because progress towards achievement of this goal invariably leads to higher use of energy services in many countries for lighting, cooling, and appliance and equipment use. The second concerns the adoption of behavioural changes and mode shifts: these too vary by scenario, and the differences affect the level of energy service demand, for example when substituting public transport, walking or cycling for short car journeys or increasing the recycling of plastics. Rising energy services demand is common in each scenario, but how this translates into overall energy and emissions trends is subject to the technologies deployed and innovation unlocked in each outlook. A range of technology mixes can meet needs for heating, cooling or mobility, each with distinctive implications for cost, resource use and pollution. We explore various pathways in this chapter, examining how decisions to invest in different technologies and resources could meet the world’s future energy needs and how policies shape the choices ahead. We have four focus areas.  First, we examine trends in global final energy consumption in the industry, transport and buildings sectors, and how that demand is met in each scenario.  Second, we examine the outlook for electricity, including the drivers of electricity demand growth, the evolving electricity supply mix, emissions and investment.  Third, we consider oil, natural gas, coal and bioenergy, and the ways in which they will be shaped by the speed at which clean energy technologies are deployed.  Fourth, we probe the role of and outlook for specific key clean energy technologies that include solar photovoltaics  and wind power, nuclear power, electric vehicles , heat pumps, hydrogen and carbon capture, utilisation and storage . Today, global energy demand stands at around 640 exajoules . By 2035, it rises to 680 EJ in the STEPS, falls slightly to around 625 EJ in the Announced Pledges Scenario  and declines to 540 EJ in the Net Zero Emissions by 2050  Scenario – three distinct trends based on the same economic and population growth assumptions. In the STEPS, the only scenario which sees continued growth in global energy demand, the rate from now to 2035 is only around one third as high as it was over the past decade, and all the growth in energy demand comes from emerging market and developing economies. As first presented in the World Energy Outlook 2023 , in each scenario, demand for each fossil fuel peaks by 2030 . In the STEPS, coal demand begins to decline around 2025, while oil and natural gas demand both peak towards the end of the decade. After decades of the fossil fuel share of total energy supply hovering around 80%, it declines to 75% by 2030 and below 60% by 2050. In the APS, each fossil fuel reaches its peak by 2025 and the overall fossil fuel share declines to around 35% in 2050. The NZE Scenario involves a more complete transition with all fossil fuels declining from today to make up less than 65% of total energy supply by 2030 and around 15% by 2050. Global energy intensity reduced by 1% in 2023, a smaller improvement than the 2% reduction seen in 2022. Certain emerging market and developing economies made relatively slow progress, while there were significant energy intensity improvements elsewhere, including in the United States and European Union, largely driven by mild weather, high energy prices and reduced industrial activity. Annual investment in energy efficiency exceeded USD 390 billion in 2023, up from USD 300 billion in 2020. Many major economies have adopted legislative and policy measures that are set to deliver further efficiency gains over the coming years, including: the Inflation Reduction Act in the United States the Energy Efficiency Directive in the European Union the revised Act on Rationalizing Energy Use in Japan and the most recent cycle of the Perform, Achieve and Trade scheme in India. Annual intensity improvements worldwide from today to 2030 average 2,3% in the STEPS and 3% in the APS. Only in the NZE Scenario do annual improvements exceed 4%, to achieve a doubling from the 2022 baseline of 2% by 2030 in line with the pledges made by nearly 200 countries at the 28th Conference of the Parties  . The benefits of doubling efficiency improvements include reducing energy bills alleviating fuel poverty creating almost 5 million jobs globally contributing half of emissions reductions needed in the NZE Scenario by 2030 and helping to create healthier living environments. In each scenario, intensity improvements occur at a similar pace in both groupings – advanced economies and emerging market and developing economies – with advanced economies remaining on average about 35% less energy intensive than emerging market and developing economies through to 2030. Technical efficiency improvements such as building retrofits and vehicle fuel economy advances contribute the largest share of energy savings by 2030 in each scenario. Switching from direct combustion of fossil fuels to renewables, electricity and other more efficient energy sources contributes the second largest share. Behavioural changes as well as infrastructureor technology enabled changes such as mode shifting and enhanced recycling also contribute. Providing clean cooking in lieu of highly inefficient and polluting traditional cooking methods is a particularly important source of energy savings in sub Saharan Africa and other emerging market and developing economies. Total supply of modern renewables increased by 5% year on year to nearly 78 EJ in 2023, providing 12% of total energy supply. Global investment in renewables increased by 20% in 2023 to nearly USD 750 billion, equivalent to nearly 1% of global gross domestic product  . In 2023, global manufacturing capacity increased by 76% for solar PV modules and 22% for wind nacelle assembly . Global renewable capacity additions totalled over 560 gigawatts  in 2023 – a 60% increase from the previous year, led by a boom in solar PV, particularly in China – and they are set to exceed 670 GW in 2024. Installed renewables energy generation capacity expands from 4 250 GW today to more than 9 750 GW in 2030 in the STEPS, 10 900 GW in the APS and almost 11 500 GW in the NZE Scenario . Despite the gains made in the STEPS and APS, these scenarios do not meet the COP28 pledge to triple renewables capacity by 2030, which is consistent with the NZE Scenario. From today to 2030, renewables make up at least four fifths of total capacity additions in each scenario, heavily outweighing additions of unabated fossil fuel capacity, with solar PV and wind power dominating new capacity in all major markets. The share of electricity generation from renewables increases from 30% today to 45% in the STEPS by 2030, 50% in the APS and nearly 60% in the NZE Scenario, reducing cumulative emissions in 2030 from today’s level by around 1,5 gigatonnes of carbon dioxide , 3 Gt CO2 and 4,5 Gt CO2 respectively. While most modern renewables are used in the power sector, 24 EJ of modern renewables were consumed directly in end use applications in 2023, largely in the form of modern bioenergy, solar thermal and geothermal energy. These direct uses rise modestly in the STEPS, but they gain ground more rapidly in the APS and NZE Scenario in large part due to increased use of biofuels in transport, which provide an important decarbonisation pathway in sectors such as shipping and aviation where electrification is a less cost competitive solution. The use of modern bioenergy in residential buildings also increases in tandem with faster progress to provide universal access to clean cooking. Total final energy consumption across end use sectors increased by 1,7% to 445 EJ in 2023, split between the industry sector , buildings , transport , and agriculture and other non energy uses  . Consumption continues to climb steadily for the rest of the decade in the STEPS, increasing at an average annual rate of 1,3% to 2030, in line with the rate seen over the last ten years: then the pace slows, with the annual growth rate between 2030 to 2050 falling to an average of only 0,5%. In the APS, efficiency gains and higher electrification rates curb energy consumption growth: despite economic growth and improved energy access, it rises only modestly to 2030 and then falls slightly between 2030 and 2050. In the NZE Scenario, even faster electrification and energy efficiency improvements mean that energy consumption declines by 2030 and falls significantly further by 2050. By 2035, total final consumption increases by nearly 55 EJ in the STEPS, bringing it to almost 500 EJ. This increase takes place solely in emerging market and developing economies. In advanced economies, most increased consumption this decade comes from the industry sector, but this is offset by declines in other sectors, notably transport, where rising mobility needs are more than cancelled out by the use of more efficient energy carriers such as electricity these trends lead to further declines after 2030. In emerging market and developing economies, industry is the leading growth sector, contributing nearly 20 EJ of additional demand by 2030, but buildings and transport play increasingly important roles in the longer term as ownership levels of appliances and vehicles rise. Car ownership is currently five times higher in advanced economies than in emerging market and developing economies: this ratio falls to four times by 2035 and just over three times by 2050 as the global car fleet expands to 1,6 billion vehicles in 2035 and 1,9 billion in 2050. Direct energy use in end use sectors accounted for around 55% of total energy related CO2 emissions of 37,7 Gt CO2 in 2023. Current annual emissions in industry are close to 10 Gt CO2, in transport over 8 Gt CO2 and in the buildings sector less than 3 Gt CO2 . Across all scenarios, industry consistently accounts for 40% or more of total end use sector emissions. In the STEPS, CO2 emissions from end use sectors stabilise by 2030 due to the increasing use of low emissions fuels such as biofuels, hydrogen and hydrogen based fuels, and electricity: the transport sector, which currently has the highest emissions intensity, sees the biggest absolute declines. In the APS, CO2 emissions start to decline from the mid 2020s and fall much further by 2050. In the NZE Scenario, emissions from end use sectors fall more rapidly to around 1 Gt CO2 in 2050: much of these remaining emissions come from transport, reflecting the difficulty of decarbonising end uses like air travel. The share of fossil fuels in final consumption in the STEPS declines from nearly 66% today to 64% in 2030, and then falls further to 55% in 2050 . In the APS, the decline is steeper, with the share of fossil fuels falling to slightly over 60% in 2030 and little over 35% by 2050. In the NZE Scenario, the fossil fuel share drops to just over 55% in 2030 and less than 20% in 2050. By contrast, the use of low emissions fuels and electricity rises, with their share of final consumption overtaking that of fossil fuels by the early 2040s in the APS, and more than five years earlier in the NZE Scenario. The move away from fossil fuels is mainly driven by electrification of end uses, in parallel with increasing decarbonisation of power generation, with the share of electricity in total consumption rising from 20% in 2023 to over 30% in 2050 in the STEPS, over 40% in the APS and nearly 55% in the NZE Scenario. Bioenergy, hydrogen and hydrogen based fuels also play key roles in the long term, especially in hardto abate sectors where electrification faces challenges. Improved energy efficiency and rising rates of electrification are key factors in reducing the share of fossil fuels in final consumption, but their impact differs by sector. Energy use in 2030 varies the most across scenarios in the buildings sector, with a rise of around 8 EJ from 2023 in the STEPS contrasted with a 4 EJ drop in the APS and a 22 EJ drop in the NZE Scenario. These variations are largely driven by more rapid gains in access to modern, efficient energy largely for cooking in developing economies in the APS and particularly in the NZE Scenario, and by varied speeds in the rollout of mature low emissions technologies in other end uses. Industry sees the smallest variations, with light industry increasing mainly through the electrification of lowand mediumtemperature heat. In the transport sector, variations in the pace of electrification of road vehicles and fuel economy improvements slow the rate of demand growth by 2030 in the APS and stimulate a sharp fall in the NZE Scenario, even as road activity increases by around 15% by 2030. After 2030, electrification becomes the critical driver of shifting energy consumption patterns, but the uptake of electricity varies by end use within each sector. In the buildings sector, progress in space and water heating is relatively slow, with electricity providing only a 20% share of the total in 2035 in the STEPS . For other end uses in buildings, electrification reaches around 65% by 2030 in the STEPS. Most of the increase comes from cooking as traditional use of biomass declines, especially in the NZE Scenario. Light industry sees faster electrification than heavy industry, which remains reliant on fossil fuels for hightemperature processes, with the result that the electricity share of total consumption in heavy industry remains below 15% until 2050 in the STEPS. Today, transport has by far the lowest share of electrification, but the uptake of electric cars and electric two/threewheelers is well underway and on track to rise with current policy settings. The market share of electric mediumand heavy freight trucks is also projected to increase, albeit more slowly, reaching around 12% in 2030 in the STEPS. By contrast, relatively little progress is made in non road transport sub sectors such as aviation and shipping, where the potential for electrification is restricted by technical and cost limitations. In 2023, energy demand in the transport sector increased by close to 4%, which is similar to the rate seen in 2022. Much of this stemmed from increased aviation activity, which rebounded to over 90% of pre pandemic 2019 levels. Road transport also contributed significantly to the increase, up about 2%, reflecting an expansion of the passenger car fleet by over 20 million vehicles, mostly in China, India and Southeast Asia, reflecting rising incomes and population growth. By the end of this decade, energy demand in the transport sector increases by nearly 10% in the STEPS . Road transport is the primary contributor, followed by aviation. Even though the car fleet expands by over 10%, energy use in road transport rises around 5%, reflecting energy efficiency gains and the uptake of EVs. In 2023, 12% of all new cars sold worldwide were battery electric, almost 10% were internal combustion engine hybrids, and almost 6% were plug in hybrids. EV market share, including battery electric and plug in hybrids, is expected to exceed 20% in 2024, with around 5% of passenger cars on the road being electric. By 2030, more than 15% of the global car fleet is electric, as is nearly one intwo new cars sold in the STEPS. Electrification in road transport extends beyond passenger cars. For example, zero emissions heavy duty trucks accounted for a 10% share of sales in China in December 2023 , and electric buses for a 16% share of sales in the European Union in the first half of 2024 . Globally, the bus fleet is set to be over 10% electrified by 2030, and the heavy duty trucks fleet to be 3% electric. By 2035, 30% of vehicles on the road are electric in the STEPS, increasing to 35% in the APS. In the NZE Scenario, nearly 50% of the stock are EVs, cutting emissions from road transport in half and energy demand by a third relative to current levels. In 2024, some automakers in the United States appeared more cautious about investment in EV manufacturing plants, as customer demand fell short of industry expectations. However, despite challenges in meeting short term targets, automakers still aim for more than 40 million EV sales in 2030, which is reflected in the STEPS. Affordability and charging infrastructure need to be addressed to overcome potential bottlenecks. Declining battery prices should enable automakers to offer increasingly cost competitive EV models, supported by policies such as the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act in the United States which aims to improve charging infrastructure. In other regions, notably in Asia, battery swapping presents a promising option to alleviate range anxiety for both cars and trucks. By 2030, oil demand in the transport sector in the STEPS remains at current levels despite an increase in passenger activity of more than 30% and of nearly 15% in freight activity. EVs are largely responsible for this change, as their dissemination shifts an increasing share of energy demand in transport from oil to electricity. The share of road transport activity accounted for by EVs rises from 4% today to around 17% in 2030 in the STEPS, around 20% in the APS, and nearly 30% in the NZE Scenario which leads to additional electricity demand of 850 TWh, 1 000 TWh and 1 500 TWh respectively. Other changes also contribute. Micromobility, particularly with uptake of electric bikes , is gaining traction, especially in urban areas . Public transportation continues to play a crucial role, with the world’s bus fleet increasing by over 15% by 2030 and urban rail activity rising 25% by then . Electrification and energy efficiency are the key pillars to decarbonise road transport. It also plays a central part to decarbonise rail transport, with 75% of rail activity electrified by 2030 in the STEPS. Low emissions fuels such as biofuels and hydrogen also contribute to decarbonisation, particularly in non road modes of transport such as aviation and shipping. In aviation, sustainable aviation fuels have a pivotal role to reduce emissions, meeting 2% of energy demand for aviation by 2030 and over 10% in 2050 in the STEPS. In the APS this rises to 5%, and in the NZE Scenario to over 10% of aviation energy demand by 2030, slightly increasing overall aviation costs . In shipping, International Maritime Organization  targets for decarbonisation play a central part in ammonia and hydrogen taking a 4% share of shipping energy demand by 2030 in the APS, with low emissions methanol accounting for another 8% and bioenergy for a further 10%. The reduction in global oil demand in road transport also contributes to lower emissions from shipping by decreasing oil shipments. By 2030, lower global oil demand in the APS reduces energy demand from international oil tankers by 15%. Low emissions fuel consumption in the transport sector is set to rise by 30% in 2030 and to more than double by 2050 from current levels in the STEPS . Bioenergy plays a significant role in this, particularly in shipping and aviation. In the APS, low emissions fuels help avoid 550 million tonnes of carbon dioxide  emissions in road transport by 2030, and additional bioenergy is used in subsequent years to meet announced pledges, mostly in aviation and shipping. Hydrogen and hydrogen based fuels see substantial growth as they become more cost competitive in this scenario, with levels of use rising from 7 petajoules  today to 900 PJ in 2030 and 13 500 PJ in 2050: most of the hydrogen is used for road transport, and all of the ammonia is used in shipping. While low emissions fuels are crucial to decarbonise challenging sectors like aviation and shipping, energy efficiency improvements remain vital, and they result in 2 100 PJ of avoided demand by 2030 in the STEPS and 2 600 PJ in the APS in non road transport sub sectors, mostly thanks to new and more efficient stock replacing older models. Emissions reductions in shipping and aviation are driven in part by policy changes. The European Union is setting the pace with its ReFuelEU Aviation Regulation that seeks to boost the uptake of sustainable aviation fuels in the European Union by setting targets for a 6% blend share by 2030 and a 20% share by 2035. The FuelEU Maritime Regulation meanwhile targets a reduction of 80% in the emissions intensity of fuel used in shipping in the European Union by 2050, while intergovernmental policies such as the IMO Energy Efficiency Design Index, the Energy Efficiency Existing Ship Index and the Carbon Intensity Indicator are also set to drive significant efficiency improvements in shipping. Energy demand in the buildings sector declined by 0,7% in 2023. After a decade when annual growth averaged over 1%, the recent fall was primarily due to a warmer winter leading to less demand for space heating, which outweighed increased demand in other end uses. Natural gas use fell the most in 2023, dropping by over 4%, which added to the cut in demand seen in 2022 after the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Use of other fossil fuels in the buildings sector also declined in 2023. By contrast, electricity use continued to rise with its share of buildings sector demand at 37% in 2023, up from 31% in 2010, underpinned by expanding use in appliances. This decade, energy demand growth in the buildings sector slows slightly to under 1% annually in the STEPS to reach 132 EJ in 2030 . This modest deceleration continues after 2030, with annual growth averaging 0,7% from 2030 to 2050, when energy demand in the sector reaches 153 EJ. However, demand falls by an annual average of 0,5% in the APS to reach 120 EJ in 2030. It declines further in the NZE Scenario to just over 100 EJ by 2030. These varied outcomes are primarily shaped by the pace of advances in access to modern energy, with the faster shift away from highly inefficient traditional use of biomass to clean cooking in the APS and the NZE Scenario which bring substantial energy savings as well as social benefits . The wide variation across scenarios also reflects the different pace at which mature technologies are rolled out for other end uses, with faster progress in the APS and NZE Scenario underpinned by higher levels of policy support. Electricity use in the buildings sector rises significantly both as a share of energy consumed and in absolute terms. In the STEPS, electricity increases to over 40% of energy consumed in buildings in 2030 and over 50% in 2050. This equates to an increase of 10 EJ by 2030 and over 35 EJ by 2050, mostly in emerging market and developing economies. Mounting demand for cooling and for data centres helps drive electricity demand growth . In contrast, fossil fuel use in buildings declines from the mid 2020s. Natural gas demand, which accounts for a larger share of energy demand in buildings than other fossil fuels, peaks in the late 2020s in the STEPS: it declines sooner and faster in other scenarios. Energy use trends in the buildings sector vary sharply by economic grouping. The share of advanced economies in total consumption in buildings falls from around 50% in 2000 to 30% in 2050 in the STEPS . Demand from the buildings sector in advanced economies is only slightly higher in 2030 than it was in 2023: it then declines at an average annual rate of around 0,3% to 2050. Energy demand in the sector in emerging market and developing economies, by contrast, increases by an annual average 1,5% to 2030 in the STEPS, and then by 1,3% until 2050. As a result, emerging market and developing economies add over 30 EJ to global energy demand in the buildings sector by 2050, including over 7 EJ in China, nearly 4 EJ in Southeast Asia and over 2 EJ in India. In the APS and NZE Scenario, this demand growth slows after 2030, respectively averaging 0,9% and 0,3% annually. The balance of energy consumption in the buildings sector by end use shifts significantly from space heating to space cooling and appliances over the coming decades. In the STEPS, space heating demand drops by nearly 6 EJ by 2050 in advanced economies as a result of existing policies and incentives, and a warming climate. In the APS, demand falls by 13 EJ reflecting new initiatives such as the European Union’s revised Energy Performance of Buildings Directive, the 6th Strategic Energy Plan in Japan, and the Zero Emissions Building Standard in the United States. In emerging market and developing economies, space heating demand is heavily concentrated in a few large markets, notably China and Russia. Objectives for new buildings and retrofits outlined in China’s Action Plan for Carbon Peaking help to reduce heating demand in emerging market and developing economies in 2050 by nearly 2 EJ in the APS. Meanwhile demand for space cooling in emerging market and developing economies is set to rise by nearly 10 EJ by 2050 in the STEPS. Driven by rising incomes, growing population and a warming climate, it accounts for around 14% of total energy demand in buildings by 2050, up from below 7% today. Energy demand for use in other appliances rises more moderately but from a higher base, increasing by 11 EJ by 2050 in emerging market and developing economies. While partly due to population growth, the biggest driver is economic growth leading to higher appliance ownership. In lower middle income countries, such as India and Indonesia, current ownership rates are often around a third of those in advanced economies, and their rapid economic growth is set to reduce this gap significantly by mid century. Conversely, in upper middle income countries, such as China and Brazil, ownership rates for certain appliances, for example refrigerators and washing machines, are nearing those in advanced economies. Momentum is picking up in efforts to moderate rapid growth in energy demand for cooling. At the international level, dedicated fora have been established through the Buildings Breakthrough, the Chaillot Declaration and Global Cooling Pledge. Many countries are now assessing what measures should feature in national plans to manage growth in cooling demand. Stringent minimum energy performance standards for air conditioners and mandatory building codes for new construction are needed. Space cooling has seen faster growth than any other major end use in the buildings sector since 2000, increasing an average of 4% per year. This continues in the STEPS through to 2050, with an annual average rise of 3,2%. Energy demand for cooling worldwide increases by almost 4,5 EJ by 2035, which is more than all current electricity use in the Middle East. Around 75% of this increased energy demand for cooling is in non OECD Asia, with the largest absolute growth in India and China. Mounting energy demand for cooling is the largest driver of increasing peak electricity demand from buildings in emerging market and developing economies . Ownership levels for air conditioners in emerging market and developing economies rise from below 0,6 per household in 2023 to close to 1 per household by 2035, in line with the current level in advanced economies . A warming climate also increases energy demand for cooling applications. Some regions are more exposed than others, and rising demand could be amplified if extreme temperatures become more common . In the STEPS, energy demand growth for cooling is partly mitigated by energy efficiency measures, with nearly all efficiency savings related to minimum performance standards for air conditioners. While such standards are already widespread – covering around 90% of global energy consumption from space cooling – many of these measures are in their infancy and set requirements that fall far short of current potential. On a life cycle basis, efficient air conditioners cost no more than less efficient options, and in some countries they cost less. The APS reflects commitments from countries to raise energy performance standards over time to garner this cost effective potential. Even in the APS, residential cooling demand in emerging market and developing economies triples from 2,6 EJ to 7,7 EJ by 2050. Among countries that have established net zero emissions targets, pledges to cut cooling emissions by 2030 have so far focussed on appliance efficiency. Few countries have set goals to improve building envelopes this decade, and less than half of new construction in emerging market and developing economies in 2030 is compliant with building codes in the APS. However, there are signs of change. Under the Buildings Breakthrough initiative, 27 countries committed to make nearly zero energy and resilient buildings the norm by 2030. This includes 15 emerging market and developing economies, the majority of which currently lack mandatory building codes for new construction. More recently, 70 countries signed the Chaillot Declaration, which aims to improve the resilience and efficiency of new buildings, as well as material efficiency and passive performance of building retrofits. This follows a variety of recent national initiatives that address the efficiency of both building envelopes and technical building systems, for example new national cooling strategies in Cambodia, Viet Nam and Kenya. Translating these initiatives into effective national policies can help mitigate increased energy demand for cooling applications. In the NZE Scenario, where minimum energy performance standards and mandatory codes for new construction are matched by policies that significantly boost retrofit rates, the demand increase by 2050 is limited to 90%. The industry sector produces basic materials used across the global economy, including the materials required for decarbonisation. However, it is also the most CO2 intensive end use sector, accounting for almost half of total final consumption emissions. Industrial energy use is concentrated in emerging market and developing economies, which account for more than 70% of the global total. Energy demand from industry increased by 2% in 2023 and emissions by less than 1%. Fossil fuels continue to play an important role in the industry sector in the STEPS, meeting a broadly constant share of demand . Coal is widely used for steel and cement production: its use begins to fall towards the end of the decade in some regions with large industrial consumption, notably China, Europe, Japan, Korea and United States, but global natural gas consumption rises moderately as additional LNG capacities come online. However, fossil fuel use does reduce significantly in the APS and NZE Scenario after 2030 . The share of electricity in industry energy demand increases gradually over time, rising from 22% in 2023 to 25% in 2030 in the STEPS and to 27% in the APS by 2030. More than half of the additional electricity demand is in China, where electricity intensive clean energy technology manufacturing gains importance. Bioenergy already plays an important role in non energy intensive industries its consumption also increases in the APS by 50% in energyintensive industries, rising from 5 EJ to 7,5 EJ between 2023 and 2030. By contrast, bioenergy demand in STEPS only increases by 10% to 5,5 EJ. The industry sector is reliant on high temperature heat to drive chemical processes, particularly in energy intensive industries . These industries accounted for almost three quarters of energy use in the sector in 2023, but only around one fifth of the value added. Technology options to avoid emissions from fossil fuel use for hightemperature applications mostly are not yet mature. Yet, many technologies are now advancing beyond the prototype stage: most of them use CCUS and electrolytic hydrogen, but some involve direct electrification, for example, electric steam crackers. Direct electrification is more straightforward for non energy intensive industries: around half of the thermal energy that they require is used at less than 100 degrees Celsius  and can be supplied at competitive prices by heat pumps, which can also be competitive at higher temperatures . Resistance heating, bioenergy or low emissions hydrogen are alternative solutions: their growing use plays a major part in reducing unabated fossil fuel use to 20% by 2050 in the APS and phasing it out almost completely in the NZE Scenario. Current project announcements featuring near zero emissions technologies fall short of what is required in the NZE Scenario. For example, only 19 Mt CO2 of CCUS capacity is installed in the STEPS by 2030, which is 31% of the amount captured in the APS and just 7% of what is needed in the NZE Scenario. Asset lifetimes in heavy industry, particularly steel and cement plants, are usually at least around 25 years, so changing technologies is a slow process. For example, while additions of conventional capacity without abatement potential end in the NZE Scenario by 2030, slow turnover of the stock of older capacity means that it takes until after 2040 for most of the stock to be using innovative technologies. Investment certainty is needed to enable near zero emissions technology projects to go ahead. Some countries are moving in that direction: for example, Germany launched first carbon contracts for difference auctions in 2024 to reduce price risks for energy intensive industries, while the Green Innovation Fund in Japan will support the decarbonisation of manufacturing related industries until 2030. The electricity sector is the largest emitting sector in the world today, accounting for 36% of global energy related CO2 emissions in 2023. Electricity demand has grown at nearly twice the rate of overall energy demand over the last decade and is accelerating as the global economy becomes increasingly electrified. Clean energy transitions are underway, with solar PV and wind regularly setting records for growth, helped by policy support, low technology costs and the widespread potential for their deployment. Coal nevertheless remains the largest source of electricity, and fossil fuels still account for 60% of global electricity supply. The speed of clean energy transitions in the electricity sector in the years ahead will be a critical determinant of global CO2 emissions trends and the level of long term temperature increases. Global electricity demand rose by more than 2,5% in 2023, a rate similar to the average over the past decade. Two thirds of the increase in demand since 2013 was from China, driven by electrification of industrial processes and by growth in electricity demand for appliances and cooling. Other regions where demand has increased rapidly include India, the Middle East and parts of Southeast Asia, where buildings have played a major role in electricity demand growth. Uncertainties around electricity demand growth are explored in Chapter 4. From 2023 to 2030, average annual electricity demand growth accelerates to 3,3% in the STEPS, over 3,5% in the APS, and 4,5% in the NZE Scenario. From 2023 to 2050, these growth rates range from 2,4% in the STEPS to over 3% in the APS and 3,5% in the NZE Scenario. Emerging market and developing economies account for about 70% of the additional electricity demand through to 2050 across all scenarios . China alone contributes about 45% of the increase to 2030, and around 25% between 2030 and 2050. India becomes the third largest electricity consumer in the world by 2050 on the back of growth in demand of over 4% a year in all scenarios. Other emerging market and developing economies also experience robust demand growth, while advanced economies see lower annual average growth rates through to 2050 which range from 1,8% in the STEPS to 2,6% in the NZE Scenario. Global electricity demand nearly doubles by 2050 in the STEPS, more than doubles in the APS and increases 2,5 times in the NZE Scenario. These are big differences: the additional demand in the APS compared with the STEPS is roughly equivalent to the current combined electricity demand of China and India, while the additional demand in the NZE Scenario compared with the APS is roughly equivalent to the current demand of the European Union and United States combined. By 2030, the share of electricity in total final consumption reaches 23% in the STEPS, up from 20% today: it reaches around 30% in China, Japan and South Africa. In the APS, the share of electricity rises to 25%, and in the NZE Scenario it reaches nearly 30%. In advanced economies, ambitious policies supporting the adoption of EVs drive 40% of the additional electricity demand until 2035 in the STEPS . Heat pumps, appliances and air conditioning units also help drive up demand, as do the burgeoning power demands of artificial intelligence and data centres. Much of the additional demand projected in the APS comes from the industrial sector, where an increasing number of demonstration projects use electricity in energy intensive industries while at the same time the electrification of light industries proceeds more rapidly than in the STEPS. In emerging market and developing economies, the building sector contributes the majority of additional growth by 2035. Increasing ownership of appliances and rising demand for air conditioning also make major contributions to rising demand, together with the electrification of industrial production, especially in China. In the APS, more stringent minimum energy performance standards and widespread development of energy ratings for appliances and air conditioners reduce buildings electricity demand by 10% in 2035 compared with the STEPS. Buildings remains the sector that uses the most electricity in both the STEPS and APS, with the industry sector in second place. In the NZE Scenario, however, industry becomes the largest sectoral user of electricity by late 2020s as a result of the rapid electrification of light industries and the use of electricity in onsite hydrogen production for steel and chemicals. Rising EV sales are responsible for over 20% of total electricity demand growth by 2050 in the STEPS, and for an even higher proportion in the APS and NZE Scenario. Hydrogen production via electrolysis also increases electricity demand by 7 000 TWh in the APS by 2050, or about 25% of current total electricity demand, and by 12 000 TWh in the NZE Scenario: this accounts by itself for 20% of the increase in the APS, and 30% in the NZE Scenario. In 2023, fossil fuels provided 60% of global electricity supply — their lowest share of the total in the past 50 years. Coal accounted for the largest share of the total, 36%, with natural gas also playing a major part at 22%. Beyond fossil fuels, nuclear power declined slightly to a 9% share, which is half as much as 30 years ago. Despite a decline in hydropower output, renewables reached 30% of global electricity generation for the first time, with wind and solar PV together providing 13%, double the level just five years before. Renewables, led by solar PV and wind, are set to play a much larger role in power systems over the next decade and beyond. In the STEPS, solar PV and wind combined generation nearly triples from 2023 to 2030, accounting for over 90% of electricity supply growth and overtaking coal, which peaks around 2025 and then starts a steady decline . By 2035, solar PV and wind provide over 40% of electricity generation, a level that few countries have managed to date. Increased use of solar and wind on this scale requires action to modernise grids and expand power system flexibility, including through the development of multiple forms of energy storage . Hydropower output depends on precipitation and air temperatures and therefore varies from year to year, but the overall trend is one of slow growth. Nuclear power also steadily increases at the global level, while natural gas fired power reaches a peak in the late 2020s before stabilising at around the current level. More ambitious scenarios rely heavily on renewables to accelerate transitions. In the APS, the expansion of wind and solar PV is faster than in the STEPS and is complemented by stronger growth of other renewables and nuclear power: this drives down unabated coalfired power by almost 60% by 2035 and cuts natural gas use by 20%. In the NZE Scenario, additional renewables, further nuclear power, and the development and deployment of carbon capture technologies and low emissions hydrogen fully decarbonise the electricity sector by 2040: unabated coal is fully phased out by this date, and unabated natural gas is reduced by 80%. Many governments around the world have policies in place to help drive clean energy transitions in the power sector. Alongside electricity security, a key priority is the provision of support to expand renewable energy, which is often linked to specific targets. By 2023, 152 countries had set renewable electricity targets . A pledge to triple renewables capacity was announced by governments at the COP28. Many major economies now aim to increase renewable energy by 50% or more from its 2023 level by 2030, either in terms of capacity or share of electricity generation . Targets are set out in documents such as national energy and climate plans in the European Union, the 6th Strategic Energy Plan in Japan, the 10th Basic Plan in Korea, the 14th Five Year Plan in China, the National Electricity Plan in India, the Development Plan in Indonesia, and various statelevel renewable portfolio standards in the United States. Korea and India aim to more than double and Indonesia aims to more than triple the role of renewables by 2030. A second key policy priority for many governments is the need to reduce or phase out the use of unabated coal fired power generation. This reflects a recognition that the transition away from unabated coal is critical to any clean energy transition. Currently more than 95% of electricity generated from coal plants is covered by phase out commitments or net zero emissions pledges. However, while many countries have net zero emissions targets, countries responsible for just 10% of electricity generation from coal have national plans in place to phase out the unabated use of coal. Although countries responsible for a further 20% have agreed internationally to phase out unabated coal or not to develop new unabated coal fired power, there is a strong case for more to be done to announce and implement specific plans for coal in the context of wider emissions reduction goals. Austria, Belgium, Portugal and Sweden have already phased out coal fired power. The United Kingdom closed its last coal fired power plant in September 2024 and Slovakia aims to do so by the end of 2024. Beyond renewables and coal, there is widening policy support for energy storage, including the G7 agreeing to contribute to a global target of 1 500 GW of installed capacity by 2030, a sixfold increase from the level in 2023, with the aim of strengthening energy security and helping to integrate rising shares of renewables. Although pumped hydro and other forms of storage remain important, battery storage is poised to provide the lion’s share of energy storage expansion in support of the target to triple renewables capacity by 2030 . Installed battery storage capacity rises from almost 90 GW in 2023 to 850 GW in 2030 in the STEPS, over 1 000 GW in the APS and over 1 250 GW in the NZE Scenario, with the average duration increasing from around two hours currently to three hours in 2030. Policy support for nuclear power has also risen in recent years. In December 2023, more than 20 countries pledged to triple global nuclear capacity by 2050. Notable developments in several European countries include extending operations for existing reactors in Belgium, lifting a ban on developing new nuclear plants in Switzerland, the identification of new builds as a priority in Sweden and Poland, and confirmation of the importance of nuclear in France. Many countries are showing interest in small modular reactors and the first projects outside China and Russia are expected to come online around 2030. In many countries, including China, the European Union and the United States, the expansion of wind and solar PV in the STEPS is able to meet all electricity demand growth over the next decade and also to displace some fossil fuel use . While renewables expand strongly in the STEPS, they are not able to meet all demand growth in India or other emerging market and developing economies to 2035, and those countries see increases in the use of coal and natural gas in their power systems. In the APS, faster renewables deployment and more robust action on energy efficiency mean that low emissions sources of electricity are able to meet all electricity demand growth in nearly all major economies. While limitations of land availability present a challenge to the rapid expansion of renewables in some countries, globally there is more than enough available space for all solar PV and wind needed by 2050 in all our scenarios . The share of renewables – including solar, wind, hydro, bioenergy, geothermal and marine – is set to increase significantly in most regions by 2035. In the European Union, it rises to over 70% of electricity generation by 2035 in the STEPS, which is almost in line with what is needed in advanced economies overall in the NZE Scenario, and to over 80% in the APS, which would deliver what is required by the NZE Scenario . The United States currently has a lower share of renewables in its electricity mix, and it makes up ground in the STEPS: further action to fulfil announced pledges, as in the APS, would not quite reach the NZE pathway, but would get it much closer. In emerging market and developing economies, China is set to obtain two thirds of its generation from renewables by 2035 in the STEPS: another 10% would match the average rate needed in the NZE Scenario. India also makes significant gains, with renewables reaching 50% of electricity generation in 2035. Renewable energy technologies can also be deployed to produce low emissions hydrogen, and in some cases individual projects may produce both electricity and hydrogen . Global coal fired power generation is set to peak around 2025 in the STEPS, with continued growth in the near term in China, India and Southeast Asia offset by reductions in the European Union, United States and other advanced economies . By 2030, however, coal use for power generation starts to decline in most regions, and by 2035 coalfired power is down by one third compared to today. In the APS, the fulfilment of all announced pledges, including Nationally Determined Contributions , means that coalfired power declines by more than 50% by 2035, with the biggest changes compared with the STEPS in China, India and other emerging market and developing economies. The NZE Scenario calls for an even steeper 85% reduction of unabated coal fired generation by 2035 and a complete phase out by 2040. In the APS and NZE Scenario, the early retirement of coal plants accelerates, with electricity security maintained through an increase in energy storage capacity and in power system flexibility, some of which comes from demand side management . Power sector CO2 emissions were 15,3 Gt in 2023, up from 14,9 Gt in 2022, and accounted for 40% of the global energy related total. Emissions would have fallen in 2023 from their 2022 level without a hydropower generation shortfall caused by droughts . Growing demand for electricity means that emissions have risen in recent years despite decreasing carbon intensity in the power sector. Since 2010, around 70% of total power sector emissions are from coal, but the electricity mixes of both advanced economies and emerging market and developing economies now have CO2 intensities 30 60% lower than that of coal. In the same period, the electricity mix of advanced economies has been on average one third less carbon intensive and has been decarbonising more than three times faster than that of emerging market and developing economies. In the STEPS, emissions fall nearly 30% by 2035 and nearly 50% by 2050, getting back by 2050 to their level in 1994 . By 2035, CO2 emissions from emerging market and developing economies are more than six times higher than those from advanced economies , and almost half of emerging market and developing economies emissions are from China. However, power sector emissions in emerging market and developing economies peak in the mid 2020s in both the STEPS and APS. In the APS, CO2 emissions fall 50% by 2035 and more than 80% by 2050, driven by reduced use of coal and natural gas for power generation. In the NZE Scenario, CO2 emissions fall 80% by 2035 and reach net zero globally just before 2045. Shifting away from coal is at the heart of measures to achieve net zero emissions in power systems by 2035 in advanced economies and by 2040 in China. As coal is phased out, natural gas becomes the main source of emissions. Total power sector investment averaged over USD 1 trillion per year from 2019 to 2023 – including to build or refurbish all types of power plants, to expand and refurbish electricity grids and to deploy energy storage – and overtook investment in fossil fuel supply in 2020. Solar PV and wind currently account for almost 50% of the global total, and electricity grids for about one third. Global power sector investment rises to USD 1,7 trillion by 2030 in the STEPS . Investment in wind and solar PV increases by about one quarter to 2030 and investment in grids by two thirds. Battery storage investment increases three times from the current level, reaching around USD 120 billion globally in 2030, and nuclear investment slightly increases by 5%. In the APS, investment is up to USD 2,1 trillion by 2030 as low emissions sources of energy and storage technologies are deployed more rapidly than in the STEPS: investment in wind and solar PV increases 1,6 times from current levels, and annual investment in transmission and distribution grids rises to USD 690 billion in 2030. Beyond investment, upgrading and extending electricity grids calls for regulatory and planning changes . After 2030, the level of investment in almost all low emissions sources of electricity stabilises or falls back slightly in 2030s because so much has already been done to decarbonise power supply by this time, especially in advanced economies. However, the level of investment in grids and batteries increases to facilitate their crucial role in the increasing levels of electrification of the end uses. In the STEPS, investment in grids nearly doubles by 2050 from its current level, while investment in batteries increases 4,6 times. In the APS, investment in grids is 2,4 times higher than today, and investment in batteries is five times higher. Emerging market and developing economies account for more than 60% of growth in global power sector investment in the STEPS through to 2030 and beyond. China currently accounts for more than 60% of all emerging market and developing economies power sector investment, and its share does not drop below 40% through to 2030 in any of the three scenarios. In the APS, emerging market and developing economies more than double their average annual investment of USD 560 billion between 2019 to 2023 to USD 1,2 trillion by 2030, with an almost 80% increase by 2030 even in the STEPS. Advanced economies see a slower increase than emerging market and developing economies in the APS, but their level of investment in 2030 doubled in the APS and is about 55% above the average level in 20192023 in the STEPS. Fossil fuels met just under 80% of global energy demand in 2023, a share that has fallen very gradually since 2011, when it stood at 83%. Aggregate fossil fuel demand has continued to accompany broader economic growth, but in some areas this relationship is starting to loosen. This is particularly the case in advanced economies, which have seen their economies grow by 20% over the past ten years while fossil fuel use has contracted by nearly 10%, helped by investment in clean energy technologies, rising shares of services in the economy and efficiency improvements. In emerging market and developing economies, on the other hand, increasing energy needs have continued to push up fossil fuel use. Over the past ten years, their populations have swelled by 720 million people, they have experienced a 50% increase in economic growth and industrial output has risen by 40%. Floor space in buildings has increased by 40 000 square kilometres – enough to cover the entirety of the Netherlands – and fossil fuel consumption increased 25%. Nonetheless, per capita fossil fuel use in emerging market and developing economies remains at less than half the level of advanced economies if emerging market and developing economies were to match this level, global fossil fuel use would be almost double what it is today. In the STEPS, the correlation between global GDP and fossil fuel consumption seen in previous decades loosens in the years ahead, and demand for each of the fossil fuels peaks by 2030. Annual investment in fossil fuels falls from just over USD 1 trillion today to USD 650 billion in the STEPS in 2050 and drops to USD 90 billion in the NZE Scenario . Low emissions fuels offer a route to diversification, and in the APS and NZE Scenario they become essential parts of the clean energy economy. Global oil markets continue to evolve and rebalance amid shifts in geographical and sectoral supply and demand. Demand in 2023 surpassed the previous peak set in 2019, increasing by nearly 2 mb/d from 2022 levels to reach 99 mb/d, of which China contributed 1,5 mb/d. Transport accounted for a large share of the global increase: demand for road passenger cars increased by nearly 600 thousand barrels per day , while fuel use for aviation increased by 1 000 kb/d after flight activity eclipsed pre pandemic levels. Demand for oil from petrochemicals increased by 500 kb/d in 2023, almost double the average growth over the last 5 years. All of the growth on the supply side was met by non OPEC sources, primarily from the United States where over 40% of production comes from tight oil plays. Demand growth is slowing noticeably in 2024 and is expected to be less than 1 mb/d for the year as a whole. This pattern of slowing growth continues in the STEPS: the trajectory for oil demand between 2023 and 2035 in the STEPS remains broadly unchanged from the WEO 2023, and, as before, demand peaks before 2030. By 2050, oil demand is around 6 mb/d lower than in 2023, driven primarily by lower levels of demand in transport. In the STEPS, global oil demand peaks before 2030 at just less than 102 mb/d, and then falls back to 2023 levels of 99 mb/d by 2035 . Overall oil consumption is pulled down by reduced demand for oil in road transport. Surging EV sales since 2015 have already displaced around 1,0 mb/d of gasoline and diesel demand, and EVs avoid a further 12 mb/d of oil demand growth for road transport between 2023 and 2035 in the STEPS: the net result is a 2,5 mb/d contraction in oil use for road transport over this period. Fuel switching and efficiency gains reduce oil use in the buildings sector, which contracts by 1,4 mb/d. These declines are offset by a 6,2 mb/d increase in the use of oil in aviation and petrochemical production between 2023 and 2035. In the APS, oil demand falls by 17% in 2035 relative to 2023 levels. An additional 135 million EVs are on the road by 2035 compared to the STEPS. A doubling in the plastics recycling rate and material efficiency gains in chemicals between 2023 and 2035 arrest some of the growth in petrochemical demand. In the NZE Scenario, oil demand drops to 58 mb/d by 2035, with 1 350 million EVs on the road while the plastic recycling rates increase slightly compared to the APS. In emerging market and developing economies, oil demand growth in the STEPS slows from 1,8% a year in the 2015 2023 period to 1% a year in the 2023 2035 period. India sees the largest increase in oil demand over this period with a rise of 1,9 mb/d. Oil demand in China rises by just under 1 mb/d, with declines in road transport offset by growth of 1,5 mb/d in the petrochemicals sector . China is on track to overtake the United States as the world’s largest oil consuming country by 2030. In Central and South America, Africa, Middle East and Eurasia, demand continues to grow to 2050, and it accounts for around one third of total global demand by 2050, compared with 22% today. In advanced economies, the STEPS sees an acceleration in the decline in oil demand that has been evident since 2005 . In Europe, the share of internal combustion engine  vehicles in total car sales falls sharply: over 20% of cars sold today are battery electric or plug in hybrids, and this increases in the STEPS to 90% by 2035. In North America, the share of EVs in total car sales grows from around 10% today to about 70% by 2035, mostly as a result of the Environmental Protection Agency  rules recently introduced in the United States and the Electric Vehicle Availability Standards in Canada. These trends accelerate in the APS and NZE Scenario: by 2035, the overall share of EVs in car sales in advanced economies grows to almost 90% in the APS and to almost 100% in the NZE Scenario. The United States has dominated recent global oil supply growth, accounting for over half of the increase in production since 2010. In the STEPS, growth in US production continues at a slower pace through the rest of the decade and contracts by around 0,25 mb/d each year on average between 2030 and 2050. Brazil, Argentina and Guyana add more than 2,5 mb/d to supply by 2035, expanding current fields and capitalising on recent discoveries. In the APS, production starts to fall across the board from about 2030: Central and South America is the only region that sees growth in production between 2023 and 2030 before declining . The volume of crude production by members of OPEC and Russia reached a high point of around 47 mb/d in 2018 but has come under pressure since then as output from other countries has risen faster than demand: effective OPEC spare capacity is now around 6 mb/d. Supply is held relatively constant at a level between 42 44 mb/d in the STEPS through the projection period. In the APS, supply from OPEC and Russia falls by close to 1 mb/d per year on average through to 2040 and by around 500 kb/d from 2040 to 2050. The overall share of OPEC in global oil supply nonetheless rises from 34% today to 41% in 2050, similar to levels reached in the STEPS, as supply from other producer countries falls faster. Russian oil production showed initial resilience against sanctions, and the ramp up of the giant Vostok project manages to partly offset losses at mature oil fields. Production reaches a maximum level of around 11 mb/d this decade. Refineries are facing a significant adjustment period as the engine of past demand growth – road transport fuels – is projected to sputter in the years ahead. A peak in motor gasoline demand is coming into view and, in the STEPS, peak diesel demand is projected before 2030, though middle distillates are propped up by continued growth in demand for jet kerosene. Overall, oil product demand increasingly narrows toward petrochemical feedstocks, which are the only source of oil product demand growth between 2023 and 2035 apart from aviation fuels . This evolution in oil product demand across all scenarios creates an overhang of gasoline refining capacity and favours refineries that are closely integrated with petrochemical plants. Such facilities are primarily based in Asia and the Middle East, and also benefit from proximity to resilient sources of demand. Refiners in Europe are more exposed to the risks from changing product demand patterns, and some of them are therefore making a strategic shift into biofuels, low emissions hydrogen and plastic recycling. In the STEPS, global refinery capacity sees net growth of around 2 mb/d between 2023 and 2030 before starting to decline as rising EV sales and fuel efficiency gains put pressure on refining margins. In the APS, refinery runs drop by 15 mb/d by 2035, and some 30% of today’s refining capacity faces the risk of lower utilisation or closure. In the NZE Scenario, this share rises to 50% by 2035. The Middle East remains the largest crude oil exporter in all scenarios, and the share of its exports flowing to emerging market and developing economies in Asia rises from 25% of total seaborne crude trade today to 40% by 2050 in the STEPS. As a result, the Malacca Strait between Malaysia and Indonesia becomes the world’s largest chokepoint for oil and gas trade, with a higher volume of oil passing through it than the Strait of Hormuz, the chokepoint in the Persian Gulf. China remains the world’s largest oil importer through to 2050 in the STEPS, and India and Southeast Asia see imports increase by around 35% by that date. By 2050, crude oil import dependency in Asia rises from about 80% today to 90% in all scenarios. 3,5,2 Natural gas More than two years after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, global gas markets have regained a fragile equilibrium. Natural gas exports from Russia have fallen from a pre war record of 250 bcm in 2021 to 130 bcm in 2023. Natural gas demand in the European Union in 2023 was 20% below its level in 2021, and the United States was its second largest supplier after Norway, having delivered 60 bcm of LNG in 2023, or around half of its total LNG imports. Global natural gas demand increased by 0,5% in 2023, with a 40 bcm contraction in advanced economies, led by Europe, offset by 60 bcm of growth in emerging market and developing economies, led by China and the Middle East. A wave of new supply is also on the horizon: 270 bcm of new LNG export terminals are under construction, and will add another 50% to global LNG capacity, alongside an additional 200 bcm of annual production from upstream projects sanctioned since early 2022 that target local markets. Natural gas demand has been revised upward in all scenarios compared with the WEO 2023, reflecting stronger anticipated demand for gas to meet growth in electricity demand in China as well as additional demand in the Middle East, where policies to shift away from oil in electricity generation have been reaffirmed. In the STEPS, the level of demand in 2030 has been revised up by 130 bcm compared to the Outlook in 2023, reaching just over 4 400 bcm before demand peaks. Low emissions gases – biogas, biomethane and hydrogen – are poised to see strong growth in all scenarios. By 2050, they reach nearly 400 billion cubic metre equivalent  in the STEPS, a ten fold increase. In the NZE Scenario they reach 1,4 trillion cubic metres, meeting 60% of total gas demand in 2050. In the STEPS, natural gas demand growth averages 0,5% per year in the 2023 2035 period, compared with a 2% average annual rate in the 2010 2023 period. Demand reaches a maximum level around 2030 and then declines very slightly through to 2050 . This trajectory is largely a consequence of accelerating deployment of renewables, efficiency gains and the electrification of end uses. In the APS, demand begins to decline in the second half of the 2020s and is 17% lower by 2035 than it was in 2023. In the NZE Scenario, demand falls by roughly 5% per year from 2023 to 2035, and by 6% per year on average between 2035 and 2050. Coal to gas switching in the power sector in the United States in recent years is largely a consequence of cheap gas following the shale revolution, and has been responsible for over 120 bcm of natural gas demand growth between 2013 and 2022 . Rapid advances in renewables and efficiency gains in all scenarios leave little space for further coal to gas switching. However, the increase that has already taken place, together with increases in the use of natural gas in industry and own use in the LNG sector, means that the United States has been responsible for 30% of global natural gas demand growth during this period, an amount similar to China. Growth in electricity demand opens some space for natural gas use in the power sector in emerging market and developing economies, where it increases by 190 bcm between 2023 and 2035 in the STEPS. However, this is more than offset by a reduction of 230 bcm in natural gas use in the power sector in advanced economies over the same period. Industry is the second largest source of demand growth in emerging market and developing economies, recording a 150 bcm gain over the same period: this is only slightly offset by a 5 bcm contraction in natural gas use in industry in advanced economies. In the APS, natural gas demand growth in emerging market and developing economies is significantly reduced by faster deployment of renewables and more rapid efficiency gains across the board, together with scaling up the use of low emissions fuels in industry .  The STEPS sees a net increase of 200 bcm of gas production between 2023 and 2035, with supply increases of around 500 bcm in markets with growing supply offsetting a drop of around 300 bcm elsewhere . Even though its production peaks around 2030, the United States maintains its position as the world’s largest natural gas producing country through to 2050. The Middle East as a whole – led by Qatar, Saudi Arabia and Iran – sees the largest growth in supply in the STEPS: its share of rises from 17% in 2023 to almost 30% in 2050. Russian gas production fails to stage a meaningful recovery from a nadir in 2023. Sanctions exacerbate the difficulty to diversify export outlets after the loss of the European market and the absence of a material increase in domestic demand means that Russian gas production in 2035 remains around 20% below pre Ukraine invasion levels. In the APS and NZE Scenario, export outlets dry up further, and Russian gas production in 2035 falls to an average of 30 50% below pre invasion levels. After years spent developing the Vaca Muerta shale formation, Argentina is poised to sharply increase its natural gas production: it rises by 35 bcm in the STEPS to a level 80% higher than current production by 2035. Gas production also rises modestly in Brazil, but it declines in other countries in Central and South America in the STEPS, resulting in a 10 bcm net increase for the region between 2023 and 2035. In the APS and NZE Scenario this net increase in gas production in the region is erased by declining demand. Mature fields and slow upstream investment activity in North Africa bring overall natural gas production down by 15 bcm by 2035 in the STEPS, which puts a strain on its ability to meet domestic demand and export commitments concurrently. The story is different in sub Saharan Africa, where there are robust increases in production in emerging producers such as Mauritania, Senegal and Mozambique, as well as in established producers such as Nigeria. In aggregate, Africa increases production to 15% above 2023 levels in the STEPS by 2035. In the APS, this falls by 8% compared with 2023. Roughly 25% of total gas production in 2035 is exported in both scenarios. Global natural gas trade increasingly pivots toward emerging markets in Asia. Most of the increase comes in the form of LNG: the share of imports met by long distance pipeline trade falls from almost 50% in 2023 to 40% by 2035 in the STEPS, and falls further in APS and the NZE Scenario. The largest growth market for gas imports is China, which imports an additional 80 bcm in 2035 in the STEPS compared with today: 40% of this additional growth is met by pipeline, and the remainder by LNG. India is the second largest source of incremental import demand. Natural gas demand in the European Union falls to 260 bcm by 2035 – a third below levels prior to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine – and it falls more rapidly than domestic production, meaning that imports drop from a peak of 370 bcm in 2021 to below 250 bcm by 2035 in the STEPS. Japan’s gas imports fall by 40% between 2023 and 2035 as a consequence of nuclear restarts and renewables growth. Korea’s gas imports fall by almost 10% over the same period . In the STEPS, LNG demand increases by more than 2,5% per year over the 2023 2035 period, which is faster than overall natural gas demand but far less rapid than the average 6% per year LNG growth rate between 2013 and 2022. Around 270 bcm of new LNG supply is currently under construction, and this will lead to a near doubling of capacity in the United States and Qatar, which are set to dominate supply in 2035, together accounting for around 50% of global LNG trade in the STEPS by this date. This increased supply concentration is likely to put a spotlight on possible security of supply risks that might arise from extreme weather in the Gulf of Mexico and from disruption in the Middle East. Due to an upward adjustment to projected natural gas demand growth to 2030, LNG demand growth in the STEPS is higher than in the WEO 2023, reaching more than 700 bcm by 2035. However, this pace of growth does not keep pace with export capacity additions. As a result, a 130 bcm surplus emerges by 2030, bringing prices down in key importing regions like the European Union, China and Japan to a range between USD 6,58,5 per million British thermal units . This makes it difficult for some exporters to fully recover their long run marginal cost of supply during this period. This LNG surplus narrows in subsequent years as LNG demand growth continues in the 2030s, and a supply gap emerges in 2040. By 2050, around 175 bcm of additional LNG export capacity is required in the STEPS to cover both demand growth and retiring capacity. This additional supply mainly comes from the Middle East, East Africa and North America. In the APS, projects currently under construction are sufficient to meet LNG demand: this peaks at 650 bcm in 2030, and no supply gap emerges. In the NZE Scenario, demand can be met in aggregate from projects existing today, without any need for additional LNG from projects currently under construction: this has a profound effect on gas prices in importing regions, which fall to around USD 5/MBtu by 2030. Russia does not manage to replace the gas export volumes lost to Europe. Given ample supply in China to meet demand in all scenarios, we do not assume that the Power of Siberia 2 pipeline comes online. As a result, Russia’s exports to China reach a maximum level of 60 bcm per year in the STEPS through to 2050. With sanctions compounding the difficulty of increasing LNG export capacity, Russian LNG production peaks at just under 50 bcm in 2030, which is far below the government target level of 150 bcm by 2030. Global coal demand has been volatile in recent years. It dropped sharply during the Covid 19 pandemic, but it rebounded during the subsequent recovery, increased further after the Russian invasion of Ukraine, and rose to a record high in 2023 on the back of strong growth in China and India. Coal demand is projected to fall in the years ahead in all scenarios, but the timing and the speed of its decline is closely tied to the strength of climate action. In the STEPS, demand drops by around 25% by 2035 from 2023 levels, with rapid reductions in advanced economies and modest declines in emerging market and developing economies. The fall in consumption after 2035 is more widespread, with coal use about 45% lower in 2050 than in 2023. In the APS, demand falls more quickly: it is already about 45% lower than in 2023 by 2035, and 75% lower by 2050. In the NZE Scenario, global demand plunges by around 70% by 2035 and over 90% by 2050. China remains the largest consumer of coal, accounting for over half of global coal demand in 2035 in each scenario, but surging growth in renewables and slowly declining demand in industry lead coal use in China to fall over the next few years. India is the second largest coal consumer and is the main driver of future demand growth: its coal use increases in power to 2030 and in industry to 2050 in the STEPS, and its energy related CO2 emissions continue to rise before peaking around 2035. Demand increases steadily in a number of countries in Southeast Asia. Almost everywhere else, however, the STEPS sees coal demand head downwards. Advanced economies have historically consumed more coal per capita than emerging market and developing economies, but this has changed in recent years as they have retired coal plants or run them less frequently, while many emerging market and developing economies have installed new plants and used coal to meet rising energy needs. In 2023, 26 GW of coalfired generation capacity were retired globally, 88% of them in advanced economies, while 65 GW were added, almost all in emerging market and developing economies: China accounted for 47 GW  of these global capacity additions. The power sector currently accounts for 65% of world coal demand, and it continues to be the largest coal user in the STEPS and APS through to 2050. In the NZE Scenario, however, the speed at which renewables and energy efficiency progress in the power sector means that the industry sector overtakes it as the largest coal user by 2035. In this scenario, there is a risk that recently commissioned coal assets fail to recover their investment. By 2050, coal use in the NZE Scenario drops to below 10% of today’s level, and over 75% of its emissions are captured with the use of CCUS. Global coal production reached a new record in 2023, driven by growth in China, India and Indonesia. Over 30 new mines opened, 25 in China and four in India . China accounted for around 55% of global coal supply. India nearly overtook Indonesia as the second largest coal producer following two years of record increases in production, and it plans to double coal output by 2030. Despite raising production, China continued to increase coal imports in 2023, while Indonesia and Mongolia raised exports. In the STEPS, coal production peaks around 2025 and then falls by nearly 30% to 2035, dropping by 50% in advanced economies and 25% in emerging market and developing economies. It then continues to fall through to 2050. The supply of steam coal, mainly used in the power sector along with lignite, drops by close to 55% to 2050 the production of coking coal, mostly used in steel production, falls by about 25%. In the APS, global production falls by around 50% to 2035 and by nearly 80% to 2050. China, in line with its pledge that its total CO2 emissions will peak before 2030, accounts for most of this decrease, reducing its production by over 1 600 Mtce by 2035 and nearly 2 800 Mtce by 2050 this reduction is larger than that of all other economies combined. In the NZE Scenario, global coal supply declines by around 70% to 2035 and by over 90% to 2050 . Global coal exports approached historical records in 2023, driven mainly by increased activity in the Asia Pacific region, which accounts for 80% of total imports. Indonesia and Australia were responsible for over half of global exports in 2023, with Indonesia solidifying its position as the largest exporting country. Australia provides 45% of global coking coal exports, and Indonesia around 40% of steam coal exports. China is the largest single importing country: it draws in around 30% of the global total, and these imports meet 10% of its domestic demand. India, Japan and Korea together account for roughly a further 35% of global imports. In the STEPS, coal trade falls around 25% by 2035 and 40% by 2050 as China’s market shrinks and India increases domestic production. Demand for high quality steam coal in advanced economies faces a tighter market as Russia’s exports diminish. In the APS, coal use falls faster, causing trade to drop by around 45% to 2035 and nearly 75% to 2050. India overtakes China as the largest single importer of coal before 2030, while Indonesia and Australia remain the major exporters, and imports of coking coal to Europe, Japan and other advanced economies decline to around one fifth of 2023 levels by 2050. In the NZE Scenario, the transition away from coal is fast, and trade falls to just under 10% of 2023 levels by 2050. Coal prices surged amid supply shortages in 2021 and were followed by even higher prices in 2022, leading major coal consumers like China and India to scale up investment in domestic production. This led to an increase of over 5% in investment in global coal supply in 2023 . Emerging market and developing economies accounted for around 90% of all coal investment in 2023, with China being by far the largest single coal investor across all sectors. Investment in advanced economies has been slowly dwindling and continues to fall in all scenarios, with the highest absolute decrease to 2050 taking place in Australia. Investment in coal supply and coal fired generation totalled some USD 195 billion in 2023. Investment in the STEPS responds to falling demand by dropping to 60% below its 2023 level by 2035 and 80% below it by 2050. Around 60% of this remaining investment is concentrated in China, India and Southeast Asia. In the APS, investment falls by around 75% by 2035 and 85% by 2050. In the NZE Scenario, investment falls to less than 5% of 2023 levels by 2050 and is mostly geared to supply facilities equipped with CCUS. Global bioenergy consumption was around 60 EJ in 2023. The use of biomass such as wood, charcoal and other solid bioenergy in traditional cooking stoves accounted for about one third and modern bioenergy for the remainder. In the industry sector, modern solid biomass is mainly used where process residues are available, such as food or paper production. It can also be employed in the power sector as a dispatchable source of renewable electricity, or in improved cookstoves to replace the traditional use of solid biomass. Transport biofuels, primarily etha nol and biodiesel, can be used across different transport modes but can have long term advantages in areas where electrification is challenging, such as shipping and aviation. Biogas is used as a local source of dispatchable heat and power, or when upgraded, can be converted to biomethane for use as a drop in replacement for natural gas. Modern bioenergy is versatile, but its sustainability credentials have come under scrutiny. Currently, around 20% of its supply comes from cropland dedicated to conventional biofuel production, and therefore is potentially competing with food production. The remaining 80% of supply is from organic waste streams, and forest and wood residues. Questions have been raised about this type of feedstock development on the grounds that it can have negative effects on biodiversity and greenhouse gas emissions. Clear sustainability criteria and tools such as life cycle greenhouse gas performance standards are essential to ensure that the future development of bioenergy resources commands widespread public acceptance. Modern bioenergy demand worldwide increases from 42 EJ today to 56 EJ by 2035 and to more than 70 EJ by 2050 in the STEPS . In the APS and NZE Scenario, production rises to almost 100 EJ by 2050, with the majority of feedstocks derived from sustainable sources such as forestry and agricultural residues, recycled organic material and other organic waste streams. The shift to these feedstocks is driven by regulations that differentiate feedstocks based on their life cycle emissions and provide enhanced financial support to projects with relatively low emissions intensities. Solid bioenergy accounts for around 85% of total modern bioenergy demand. This share declines in all scenarios to around three quarters by 2050. In the STEPS, modern solid bioenergy demand reaches 45 EJ by 2035 and 55 EJ by 2050, with notable demand growth from the power sector in China and industry in India. The APS and NZE Scenario both project higher growth, to 75 EJ by 2050. The use of solid biomass for power generation is the single largest source of demand for bioenergy in these two scenarios. This is primarily the result of a large requirement for dispatchable power in a world in which electricity accounts for around half of total final consumption. The largest source of growth is the power sector in China, where consumption grows from 3 EJ today to 7 EJ in 2050 in the APS. Demand for liquid biofuels rose by around 7% in 2023 to reach 2,3 million barrels of oil equivalent per day . In the STEPS, demand increases to 3,2 mboe/d in 2035 and to 4,1 mboe/d in 2050, mainly due to an increase in sustainable aviation fuel  demand from almost zero today to over 0,8 mboe/d. In the APS, liquid biofuels rise to 6,3 mboe/d by 2035 and 7 mboe/d by 2050, with over half of the increase above the level in the STEPS from the scaling up of SAF and most of the rest from increased biodiesel demand. In the NZE Scenario, the use of liquid biofuels expands more rapidly than in the other scenarios, reaching 6,5 mboe/d by the early 2030s, with SAF making up around 20% of total demand. Demand plateaus in the NZE Scenario after 2035 and is below APS levels by 2040 as electrification takes over many end uses faster and more thoroughly than in the APS. In the STEPS, liquid biofuel demand expands by around three quarters between 2023 and 2035 in emerging market and developing economies but falls by 10% in advanced economies. By 2050, Brazil, Indonesia and India, which are each able to leverage a wide pool of potential feedstocks, together account for half of liquid biofuel demand, compared with 30% today. In the APS, growth is more evenly distributed as countries with net zero emissions pledges use a wide range of feedstocks to develop their bioenergy resources: by 2050, demand for liquid bioenergy rises by 40% in advanced economies and more than triples in emerging market and developing economies. In the NZE Scenario, demand more than doubles in emerging market and developing economies by 2050. In the STEPS, combined biogas and biomethane demand more than doubles by 2035 to reach 90 bcme. In all scenarios, the share of biomethane in total biogases demand increases by 2050, driven largely by the value attached to its use as a dispatchable source of energy and as a drop in substitute for natural gas. The cost gap between natural gas and biomethane currently averages around USD 10/MBtu in key gas consuming regions, but this narrows to USD 4/MBtu in the APS reflecting CO2 pricing, policy support and economies of scale. In the STEPS, advanced economies see their share of total global demand decline from about 50% today to just 21% in 2050. Demand in China meanwhile rises considerably, reaching nearly 100 bcme by 2050 and accounting for 40% of global demand. In the APS and NZE Scenario, total biomethane demand amounts to around 220 bcme by 2050, compared with about 150 bcme in the STEPS. Clean energy is experiencing rapid growth as deployment of several key technologies accelerates on the foundation of policy support and sustained cost reductions. Since 2019, clean energy growth has outpaced that of fossil fuels by a ratio of two to one. The production of low emissions electricity has expanded by almost 2 000 TWh, around 20%, despite disruption in hydropower from droughts and unscheduled downtime at some nuclear power plants. In contrast, fossil fuel based electricity generation increased by 910 TWh, around 5%, which is less than the growth of solar PV alone – 930 TWh since 2019 – and on a par with the increase in wind power output. Global investment in clean energy over this period rose by almost 50%, about 10% per year on average, and is set to reach almost USD 2 trillion in 2024. However, investment needs to increase to approximately USD 4,5 trillion per year by 2030 to deliver what is required in the NZE Scenario, and clean energy deployment needs to broaden: at present it is heavily concentrated in advanced economies and China . The momentum behind clean energy technologies is shifting the outlook for emissions even under current policy settings. In the STEPS, CO2 emissions are projected to be 6,5 Gt lower in 2030 than in our 2015 pre Paris Baseline Scenario . In the APS, the deployment of seven key clean energy technologies – solar PV, wind power, nuclear, electric vehicles, heat pumps, low emissions hydrogen and carbon capture – accounts for about threequarters of energy related CO2 emissions reductions between 2023 and 2035 and beyond. Scaling up of these technologies is also the main enabling factor for the decline in fossil fuel demand this decade in the NZE Scenario. Solar PV capacity additions increased by over 80% in 2023 to reach a new record of 425 GW. Solar PV deployment increased 2,5 times in China, which was responsible for over 60% of all capacity additions. Rapid expansion of manufacturing in China resulted in a 50% reduction in PV module costs since December 2022, which improved the competitiveness of solar PV and boosted its uptake. Advanced economies accounted for most of the remaining growth in 2023, with capacity additions of nearly 60 GW in the European Union and over 30 GW in the United States. In the rest of the world, solar PV capacity additions in 2023 were over 70 GW. Solar PV capacity additions expand by almost 60% in the STEPS by 2035, double in the APS and increase 2,5 fold in the NZE Scenario . Today, solar PV generates just over 5% of total electricity generation, but it is set to increase its share to 17% in 2030, and thus to play a crucial role in helping to meet the COP28 pledge of tripling renewable capacity by 2030. By 2035, solar PV overtakes coal fired and gas fired generation to become the main source of electricity, providing 25% of total generation in the STEPS, 30% in the APS and 35% in the NZE Scenario. The rapid rise of solar PV increases the need for power system flexibility to ensure electricity security . Worldwide wind power capacity additions increased over 50% to 116 GW in 2023, surpassing the previous record high in 2020 . Onshore wind projects accounted for 107 GW of the additions, 92% of the total. By far, China increased capacity more than any other country, adding 76 GW of wind capacity, 66% of the total. Expansion in advanced economies was much lower, with only 15 GW of wind capacity additions in the European Union, on a par with 2022, and just above 6 GW in the United States, down from over 14 GW in 2020 and 2021. However, capacity additions in the United States and the European Union are projected to increase significantly in the coming years in part reflecting the long term policy support provided by the US Inflation Reduction Act and to recent European Union policies to address the challenges posed by slow and complex permitting procedures. Issues such as the cost of financing, revenue uncertainty and delays in grid connections continue to constrain more rapid deployment, especially in emerging market and developing economies other than China. With 1 000 GW of installed capacity generating over 2 300 TWh, wind power is the largest source of variable renewable electricity today. Over 60 countries have set deployment targets for wind as part of their climate pledges. It has a central role in efforts to fulfil the COP28 pledge of tripling renewable capacity by 2030. Wind capacity additions increase in all scenarios. Wind becomes the second largest source of electricity by capacity in the STEPS by 2035, passing 2 800 GW of installed capacity and 7 500 TWh of generation. More rapid electrification and accelerated low emissions power deployment see these numbers increase even faster with installed wind capacity rising to over 3 500 GW in the APS and over 4 500 GW in the NZE Scenario by 2035. In countries open to the technology, nuclear power can be an important source of lowemissions electricity. It currently provides 9% of global electricity. It can offer baseload power, enhance grid stability and flexibility, and optimise grid capacity utilisation, making it a valuable part of a portfolio of low emissions technologies designed to achieve net zero emissions by 2050. In 2023, five new nuclear reactors with a combined capacity of 5,5 GW began operations in Belarus, China, Korea, Slovak Republic and United States. Combined with the 1,6 GW of existing reactors that were restarted after suspended operations, this more than offset the 6,3 GW of nuclear capacity retirements in 2023, resulting in a net increase of operational nuclear capacity. Through the first nine months of 2024, 4,5 GW of new nuclear capacity has been connected to the grid from new nuclear reactors in China, India, United Arab Emirates and United States. Over the same period, construction started on seven other reactors: five in China, and one each in Egypt and Russia. As of October 2024, there were 62 reactors with around 75 GW of capacity under construction, which would increase worldwide nuclear capacity by nearly 20% when connected to electricity systems. Nuclear capacity and generation are set to increase in each scenario, albeit at a slower pace than several other low emissions power technologies . Emerging market and developing economies drive this growth, notably China, which accounts for 40% of global nuclear capacity additions in the STEPS by 2035 and almost 50% in the NZE Scenario. These projected additions mean that China is on track to have the largest nuclear power capacity in the world by around 2030 in each scenario. Small modular reactors are under development in several advanced economies, including Canada, France, Japan, Korea, United Kingdom and United States. China and Russia are also developing them. If they can be brought successfully to market at reasonable costs, they could provide new opportunities for nuclear power in more markets around the world. While electric cars currently account for around 20% of new car sales, they represent less than 5% of the total number of cars on the road. Tight margins, high inflation, the phase out of purchase incentives in some countries, and a lack of public charging infrastructure have raised questions about how fast EV uptake can be increased. However, global sales data remain robust. In 2023, global electric car sales, including battery electric and plug in hybrids, reached about 14 million units. Sales are expected to grow this year to around 17 million, representing more than one in five cars sold. In the first half of 2024, electric car sales increased by around 25% compared to the same period in 2023, driven largely by strong performance in China, which accounted for 60% of global sales. In August 2024 alone, electric car sales in China exceeded 1 million, and sales in 2024 as a whole are set to exceed 10 million. By the end of 2024, EVs are expected to account for nearly half of all cars sold in China. In the STEPS, the share of electric car sales rises to over 55% by 2035 . Key drivers of this growth include the rapid expansion of the Chinese EV market, newly implemented EPA regulations in the United States, CO2 emissions standards in the European Union, and the launch of new EV models in markets such as India, Southeast Asia and Latin America. Continued reductions in battery costs also play a part, with global average battery cell prices to drop below USD 80/kWh during the first nine months of 2024, sustaining the optimism . Significant investment over the past five years has led to battery manufacturing capacity far exceeding current demand. In 2023, global EV battery manufacturing capacity was around 2,2 TWh, while demand was approximately 750 gigawatt hours . Yet, the current excess capacity may not last very long: battery demand is set to rise very quickly, increasing more than fourfold by 2030 in the STEPS, fivefold in the APS and sevenfold in the NZE Scenario. However, manufacturing capacity appears capable of keeping pace: committed and existing battery manufacturing capacities together are close to what is needed by 2030 in the NZE Scenario. Electric cars are becoming more affordable as competition intensifies, especially in China. Around 60% of electric cars sold in China today are cheaper than their average internal combustion engine  equivalent, but electric cars generally remain more expensive than their ICE equivalents in Europe and the United States, though much depends on the particular country and car segment . Mass market adoption of EVs requires the introduction of more affordable models to the market. Many automakers plan to launch cheaper electric models in Europe and the United States. Declining battery prices should also improve affordability. Heat pumps today account for 12% of sales of residential heating equipment worldwide. They have already overtaken sales of fossil fuel based heating systems in some markets such as France and the United States. By 2035, their market share is set to almost double in the STEPS, reaching approximately 30% in the APS and 40% in the NZE Scenario . However, in 2023 global heat pump sales marked a 3% decline, a shift after two consecutive years of double digit growth driven by the energy crisis. Sales rose by 12% in China, but it was the only major market to buck the trend. Several factors, with varying regional impact, contributed to the global slowdown, including a decrease in natural gas prices from their 2022 peaks, policy and subsidy changes, less new building construction, and broad consumer aversion to large ticket items amid high interest rates and inflation. The decline in heat pump sales in 2023 also reflects a broader downturn in heating equipment sales in some regions. Wide deployment of heat pumps in a variety of applications can help meet climate targets. Despite the slight decline in sales in 2023, there are reasons to expect a pick up in the years to come. Heat pumps are becoming increasingly competitive with gas boilers in key markets over their lifetimes. When considering both cooling and heating, heat pumps already represent one of the most cost effective options, even in markets where natural gas prices are relatively low, such as the United States. Additionally, there are numerous recent investment announcements and upcoming funding support measures, such as the Inflation Reduction Act in the United States, which aim to develop local manufacturing capabilities and to lower costs. Despite the progress being made and the projections of rising sales, upfront costs often remain high, particularly for low income and middle income households, and the design of electricity tariffs and energy taxes still disadvantages heat pumps compared to fossil fuel boilers in some countries. Maintaining policy stability and heat pump subsidies over the long term, and reforming electricity and gas tariffs in the context of declining gas prices will be critical to provide market actors with visibility while sustaining the rapid manufacturing capacity expansions seen in recent years. Growing sales are going to require more and more skilled installers, which is another issue for governments to consider. Global hydrogen production reached 97 Mt in 2023, an increase of almost 2,5% compared to 2022. Production remains predominantly reliant on unabated fossil fuels . Hydrogen produced from natural gas without CCUS accounted for 63% of the global total coal without CCUS, primarily in China, was responsible for 20% and by product hydrogen for a further 16%. Low emissions hydrogen production in 2023 was below 1 million tonnes hydrogen  and was primarily derived from fossil fuels with CCUS technologies production from water electrolysis was below 100 thousand tonnes hydrogen  and it is primarily located in China. In 2023, worldwide installed capacity of water electrolysers for dedicated hydrogen production reached 1,4 GW, and the capacity added in 2023 nearly matched the cumulative global installed capacity up to 2022. China, which accounted for less than 10% of the global installed capacity in 2020, was responsible for more than four fifths of the capacity that came online in 2023, including the world's largest electrolyser project, the 260 MW Kuqa plant by Sinopec. Projected low emissions hydrogen production from announced projects could reach 49 Mt H2 by 2030. Excluding those in very early stages of development, production could exceed 26 Mt H2 by 2030 and could meet what is required in the APS in 2030 for lowemissions hydrogen production. However, this 26 Mt H2 would represent only 40% of the total low emissions hydrogen production needed in the NZE Scenario in 2030. If projects at early stages are included, the 49 Mt H2 by 2030 represent three quarters of projected needs in the NZE scenario. The largest part of the remaining gap in this scenario consists of low emissions hydrogen produced from electrolysis, while production from fossil fuels with CCUS is already closer to the projected value in the NZE Scenario. By 2050, low emissions hydrogen production in the APS accounts for 82% of global hydrogen production, thanks to its use in heavy industry, transport, production of hydrogen based fuels and electricity generation. In the NZE Scenario, low emissions hydrogen production accounts for 70% of all hydrogen production by 2035, which rises to more than 95% by 2050. Low emissions hydrogen produced from fossil fuels with CCUS technologies accounts for over 20% of total hydrogen production both in the APS and in the NZE Scenario by 2050, capturing over 585 Mt CO2 in the APS and around 615 Mt CO2 in the NZE Scenario. Global electrolyser production accounts for 65% of total hydrogen production in the APS and almost 80% in the NZE Scenario by 2050, requiring the installation of 2 000 GW of electrolyser capacity in the APS and 3 000 GW in the NZE Scenario. Renewable energy capacity will need to increase significantly to meet electricity demand that arises from low emissions hydrogen production. By 2050, the installed capacity of renewables for hydrogen production reaches 3 000 GW in the APS and nearly 5 000 GW in the NZE Scenario, with almost 80% of this capacity coming from solar PV. The dedicated renewables generation for hydrogen production accounts for more than 10% of global electricity generation in APS by 2050 and 15% in NZE. Global hydrogen and hydrogen based fuel trade increases in 2050 to almost 60 million tonnes of hydrogen equivalent  in the APS and almost 75 Mt H2 eq in the NZE Scenario, representing around 20% of overall low emissions hydrogen demand in both scenarios. This requires the development of extensive infrastructure for the storage and transport of both hydrogen and ammonia, even though some elements of the existing infrastructure for fossil fuels could be utilised. Carbon capture, utilisation and storage  is currently applied at around 45 facilities worldwide with a capture capacity of roughly 50 Mt CO2 per year. While expansion of operational capacity has been slow in recent years, announced projects indicate potential strong growth on the horizon. Realisation of all the projects announced worldwide, which could be completed by 2030, would total 435 Mt CO2 of capture capacity and around 615 Mt CO2 of storage capacity per year. However, this is far from assured as only 20% of the announced capture capacity and 15% of the announced storage capacity have reached a final investment decision or are already in operation . For the next decade, the list of announced projects falls short of what is needed to capture 1,3 Gt CO2 globally by 2035 in line with the APS, and still further below the 2,5 Gt CO2 required in the NZE . To get closer to NDC and net zero emissions targets, new projects are needed to reduce emissions from fossil fuel fired power plants and in hard toabate industrial processes. In both the APS and NZE Scenario, CCUS technology is also employed to produce low emissions hydrogen from natural gas, accounting for 10 15% of total emissions captured annually by 2050. The use of atmospheric carbon dioxide removal increases especially in the NZE Scenario, to reach 1,2 Gt CO2 by 2050, or a fifth of all captured emissions. In the power sector, carbon capture technologies offer the ability to significantly reduce CO2 emissions from coal fired power plants, which emitted 11,3 Gt CO2 in 2023, or almost 30% of global energy related CO2 emissions. With around 9 000 coal fired units in operation today, many of which have potentially long lifetimes ahead, CCUS could have a role to reduce their emissions to keep climate targets within reach. In the STEPS, carbon capture in the power sector makes limited progress since few projects have reached the stage of final investment decision, and there are few concrete policy targets. In the APS and NZE Scenario, however, carbon capture expands rapidly to 2035 and beyond, to reach around 1 050 Mt CO2 in the APS and 1 300 Mt CO2 in the NZE Scenario by 2050. This supports the emissions reductions for coal plants achieved in these scenarios, along with repurposing them for flexibility, retrofitting them to use low emissions ammonia or retiring them early . In the industry sector, there is currently a large gap between project announcements and the required rates of emissions capture in the APS by 2035. About 4,5 Mt of capture capacity operates in industry today, and a further 39 Mt of planned capacity has progressed to the feasibility study stage or beyond. However, even if all planned capacity were realised, it would fall well short of the 330 Mt CO2/year captured in the APS by 2035, half of which the APS projects to be deployed in the cement sub sector, and much of the rest from the production of chemicals and steel. Due to project announcements and policies such as the US Inflation Reduction Act, the Canadian CCUS Investment Tax Credit, and the EU Emissions Trading System, two thirds of the deployment in 2030 in the APS is in advanced economies. These innovative projects and supporting policies demonstrate the feasibility and improve the competitiveness of carbon capture technologies. Beyond 2030, however, two thirds of CCUS deployment in the industry sector by 2035 is projected to be in emerging market and developing economies, where energy intensive industries are concentrated. The Stated Policies Scenario  is based on analysis of current policy settings and regulations. It aims to provide an understanding of where prevailing regional and global energy trends are leading us. However, the energy sector is influenced by a wide range of factors that make for uncertainty, as discussed in Chapter 2. These factors range from shifting geopolitics to changing policies and customer behaviour, and from fast evolving climate impacts to changing markets and new technologies such as artificial intelligence . In this chapter we explore several key uncertainties, using a set of sensitivity cases to investigate how outputs could diverge from the STEPS trajectory. We focus our analysis of uncertainties on the STEPS because it is the scenario which provides a sense of the prevailing direction of travel for the energy sector. The sensitivity cases do not change the broad policy backdrop that underpins and drives the STEPS, or the economic and demographic assumptions that are reflected in the STEPS. Rather, they assess how varying some of the assumptions about deployment rates in the STEPS might affect the energy demand outlook by fuel, sector and region, focusing in particular on electric vehicles , renewables deployment, the liquefied natural gas  surplus and electricity demand. Each uncertainty is explored through the framework of the Global Energy and Climate  Model, which allows us to quantify impacts, and to combine different impacts to provide a better understanding of a plausible range of outcomes for demand by energy source, type and associated carbon dioxide  emissions. When carrying this out, we consider the implications of each uncertainty for all fuels, including coal and renewables, as well as for CO2 emissions. We focus on their direct impacts and avoid making assumptions about consequential synergistic or counterbalancing effects in other areas of services demand. To isolate the impact of the factors analysed, we have assumed for our sensitivity cases that the price environment is consistent with the trajectories in the STEPS. There are many uncertainties that bear on the energy outlook. Those we have selected are all important in terms of their potential impacts and are currently the subject of much debate. We have chosen not to look at the impacts of specific geopolitical events or changes to trade patterns that could occur, or to make assumptions about specific policy changes, but rather to focus on potential shifts in deployment rates, whatever the cause, with the aim of shedding light on the direction and scale of the impacts they might have. All aspects of energy are subject to a wide range of uncertainties, and so are our scenarios. The uncertainties we explore in detail in this chapter are by no means comprehensive, but they are all important and topical. A central goal of sensitivity analysis is to explore the possible impact of changes to modelling results. The analysis presented in this chapter is intended to provide insight into what those impacts might be, and thus to help improve understanding of the energy system. We focus on four main areas: EVs, renewables deployment, the LNG surplus and electricity demand. The electric vehicle  market is expanding rapidly, leading to a move away from oil to electricity in road transport. Growth has been especially rapid in recent years: EV sales more than tripled between 2018 and 2023, with China alone accounting for over half of the increase. However, there are uncertainties about the future pace of growth in the EV market. In the STEPS, our projections of EV trends and sales take account of factors such as consumer response, advances in technology and policy support. The sensitivity cases consider some of the uncertainties that could affect these parameters. Our EV category includes plug in hybrid electric vehicles , which have a powertrain that enables use of two energy sources, and we consider the impact of variations in that usage. Renewables account for a growing proportion of electricity generation, and their deployment is set to continue to increase rapidly. Growth is driven primarily by wind and solar photovoltaics , which together increased by 16% year on year in 2023, with over half of that expansion taking place in China. The rapid pace of renewables growth brings both risks and opportunities. Risks could arise from pressures in supply chains or difficulties in permitting, notably for wind opportunities could arise from further large reductions in costs of the kind that have benefited solar PV in the past, which could lead to an acceleration of renewables deployment. In addition, developments such as a switch from oil to gas in power generation in the Middle East, for example, could have knock on implications for the renewables sector. A wave of new LNG export capacity is under construction, which has the potential to create a surplus of supply in global gas markets. Downside pressure on natural gas prices could arise from the additional supply, which could make LNG use more attractive for industry, incentivising coal to gas switching. Lower natural gas prices also reduce the attractiveness to consumers for switching from gas boilers to heat pumps, which could potentially delay the uptake of this more efficient form of heating. The growth in demand for electricity use in data centres and artificial intelligence  has garnered a lot of attention recently. Growth will no doubt continue, but there are uncertainties over its pace, which will be influenced by factors such as market trends, algorithm developments and improvements in the efficiency of hardware and software. Appliances and air conditioners account for a rising proportion of demand in emerging market and developing economies, with increasing levels of ownership reflecting economic growth and a rapidly expanding stock of buildings. This is exemplified by the 5% growth in energy demand for appliances in 2023, with more than half of this growth in China. Appliances tend to be less efficient in emerging market and developing economies than in advanced economies, reflecting in part a strong second hand market and more limited energy efficiency measures. The pace at which the efficiency of appliances improves and the extent to which levels of ownership increase together represent a significant uncertainty in electricity demand projections. Climate change is already leading to an increasing number of extreme weather events. This includes heat waves which increase electricity demand in the short term by driving up immediate cooling needs and in the longer term by pushing up the level of ownership of air conditioners. The extent to which heat waves occur in the years ahead and the way that responses to them affect electricity demand is another uncertainty. Each uncertainty has an impact across more than one fuel type, reflecting the interconnected nature of the energy system. Most of the uncertainties we explore touch on the generation and/or demand of electricity. A variety of fuels contribute to power generation, and changes that affect one of these fuels have implications for others in the mix. For example, while EVs displace demand for oil, they also increase demand for electricity which could be generated using coal, natural gas, oil or a renewable energy source: the specific mix depends on location and timing. Some of the uncertainties explored do not directly impact electricity demand, but they still have implications for multiple primary energy sources. For example, changes from using coal to natural gas in industry, or from using oil to natural gas for power generation in the Middle East. Here again much depends on location and timing. In the case of electric vehicles, the pace of EV growth in the high demand case is slower, with a delayed rollout mainly in North America and Europe. In the low demand case, EV growth is faster, with enhanced utilization of manufacturing capacity, leading to increased sales primarily in emerging markets and developing economies  outside of China. The impacted fuels are oil, natural gas, electricity, and coal. Regarding PHEV electric mode operation, in the high demand case, there is less use of the electric propulsion mode by PHEVs. In the low demand case, there is more use of the electric propulsion mode by PHEVs. The impacted fuels are oil, natural gas, electricity, and coal. For the pace of renewables deployment, in the high demand case, wind capacity expansion faces difficulties, causing delayed wind deployment. In the low demand case, solar PV growth is faster, with solar PV capacity expansion exceeding expectations. The impacted fuels are natural gas, electricity, and coal. For Middle East power generation, in the high demand case, there is a delay in the shift from oil fired power generation to gas. In the low demand case, there is a faster transition from oil to gas in power generation. The impacted fuels are oil and natural gas. For coal to gas switching, in the high demand case, increased industry coal to gas switching occurs, with industrial demand in China and Southeast Asia taking up some of the LNG oversupply. The impacted fuels are natural gas and coal. Regarding heat pump uptake, in the high demand case, there is slower growth of heat pump installation. The European Union and China take up some of the LNG oversupply, leading to lower rates of heat pump installation. The impacted fuels are natural gas and electricity. For data centers/AI, in the high demand case, there is faster growth in data centers, leading to stronger energy demand growth. In the low demand case, data center growth is slower, with weaker energy demand growth. The impacted fuels are natural gas, electricity, and coal. For efficiency improvements, in the high demand case, there are lower gains in appliance efficiency, especially in emerging markets and developing economies . In the low demand case, there are faster efficiency gains in EMDE. The impacted fuels are natural gas, electricity, and coal. In the case of heat waves, in the high demand case, more frequent, intense, and longer duration heat waves drive up ownership of cooling and air conditioning systems, especially in EMDE. In the low demand case, heat waves are less frequent, less intense, and of shorter duration. The impacted fuels are natural gas, electricity, and coal. Our oil and gas sensitivity analysis suggest potential variations could alter total demand for oil by as much as 3%, and gas by as much as 4% by 2035 relative to the STEPS . Variations in electricity demand for our selected sensitivity elements reach almost 5% in 2035 compared to the STEPS, with related impacts on coal that reach 5% of total demand in 2030 before diminishing. Combining all the sensitivity components and interactions into high and low cases indicates that CO2 emissions peak within a few years of the STEPS . In the high case, emissions are 1,6% higher in 2030 and 1% higher in 2035 than in the STEPS. In the low case, emissions are down 1,6% in 2030 and 3,6% in 2035. These variations add up to 5 gigatonnes  to cumulative energy sector emissions over the period to 2035, or reduce them by as much as 7 Gt. Across our sensitivity analysis, overall CO2 emissions are affected less than the demand for each fuel as a result of the balancing effects that take place between fuels when combining sensitivities. For example, while emissions from oil use are reduced in the faster EV growth sensitivity, this is counteracted, albeit to a lesser extent, by slightly higher power sector emissions due to increased electricity demand. The changes from the STEPS presented by the sensitivity analysis here for oil, natural gas and coal are threeto ten times less than those between the STEPS and the Announced Pledges Scenario  in 2030, and sixto thirty times less than those between the STEPS and the Net Zero Emissions by 2050  Scenario for the same year. Oil demand peaks by 2030 in the STEPS after increasing by about 2,6 million barrels per day  from 2023 to 2030. Within this decade, rising sales of EVs and improvements in fuel efficiency lead to petrochemicals taking over from road transport as the main contributor to oil demand growth. The pace of EV sales and the role of PHEVs are two key uncertainties for the oil outlook, and the degree of oil to gas switching in the power sector in countries in the Middle East is a third. Exploring and combining these sensitivities, we find that global oil demand peaks within a few years of that for the STEPS in the high demand case with an additional 1,7 mb/d of oil use, and in the low case with 0,7 mb/d less use of oil . By 2035, oil demand across the sensitivities ranges from 97 mb/d to 102 mb/d. EVs are one of the key factors tempering future oil demand. Annual electric car sales rise from 14 million today to over 40 million in 2030 and nearly 60 million in 2035 in the STEPS. This shift to EVs displaces over 6 mb/d of oil demand by 2030 and 13 mb/d in 2035, with most of the savings deriving from passenger cars. However, the amount of oil displaced depends heavily on how quickly EV sales continue to increase. Electric car sales were up by around 25% year on year in the first half of 2024, with China accounting for about 80% of this increase. Some regions like Asia show robust growth, and North America has seen a rise of nearly 13%. But sales are rising more slowly in other parts of the world for various reasons. For example, some EV subsidies in the European Union have been phased out, and more stringent CO2 emissions standards are not due to take effect until 2025 . A wide range of factors will affect the future rate of EV uptake, including policy support, fuel and emissions standards, the extent to which more affordable EV models become available, the rollout of charging infrastructure, consumer preferences and company strategies. The market share of new electric passenger cars sold in the STEPS reaches about 45% by 2030. In the Slower EV growth case, this figure decreases by close to ten percentage points. In the Faster EV growth case, it increases by close to five percentage points, and the impact becomes more pronounced beyond 2030, particularly in emerging market and developing economies outside China as they significantly expand their car fleets: as a result, the market share of electric cars reaches two thirds by 2035 in the Faster EV growth case, compared with just over 55% in the STEPS during the same period. Certain regions are at higher risk of slowdown in EV sales than others, especially those with strong policies or ambitious goals that may be delayed, cancelled or fail to be met. The risks are particularly acute as markets transition from early adoption of EVs to a phase in which EVs account for the majority of sales. In the United States, for instance, there is uncertainty about the future evolution of greenhouse gas emission standards, and the path that is taken will have significant implications for future EV demand. Any slowdown in the United States, which accounts for about 85% of the entire North American car market, could have ripple effects throughout the region. In the European Union, a review of its CO2 standards in 2026 will assess progress toward achieving 2035 targets, and its outcome is likely to have implications for the speed of EV adoption in EU member countries. Elsewhere, some advanced economies in Asia are facing challenges to increase their EV market share to levels that are comparable to those in other advanced economy markets, while recently announced EV targets in Australia may require additional support measures. Even in China – the largest EV market – PHEVs now account for over 30% of total electric car sales, suggesting that consumers still have concerns about range anxiety arising from a perceived lack of adequate charging infrastructure. In this sensitivity case, we assume that these various risks lead to electric car sales being around 10% lower than in the STEPS by 2035. Electric car sales in the United States are close to 10% lower than in the STEPS, and sales in the European Union are 5% lower. Most of the rest of the reduction is in China, where sales are assumed to be around 7% lower than in the STEPS. As a result of these changes, oil demand is around 2 mb/d higher in 2035 than in the STEPS, with the United States and China being key sources of variations . This does not affect the timing of peak oil demand projected in the STEPS: the peak still comes by the end of the decade, but at a level of around 103 mb/d rather than below 102 mb/d as projected in the STEPS. Emerging market and developing economies outside China offer an opportunity to accelerate EV uptake. Spare Chinese EV manufacturing capacity could feed into growing demand in these economies, especially those with established trade routes to China, and they could introduce further domestic measures to support this growth. Car production utilisation rates, encompassing both internal combustion engine  vehicles and EVs, in China are low, at around 50% of total manufacturing capacity. Typical car plants in other regions operate at about 70% capacity on average. While car production utilisation rates in China could exceed 90% for a few large EV manufacturers, there is excess capacity available that could produce 5 million more EVs annually. This could feed demand from emerging market and developing economies as they mature. Plans to scale up domestic EV production in parts of Asia and Latin America could also meet growing demand. In this sensitivity case, we increased global electric car sales by an additional 11 million in 2035, on top of the over 55 million electric car sales that already feature in the STEPS . We assumed that these additional sales would mostly be in emerging market and developing economies outside China. This leads to a reduction in oil demand of 1,8 mb/d in 2035. The reduction does not affect the date when of peak global oil demand is reached in the STEPS: the peak still comes by the end of this decade, albeit at a level approximately 0,3 mb/d lower than in the STEPS. The share of plug in hybrid electric vehicles in total electric car sales has fluctuated between 25% and 40% since 2015. There has been significant recent growth in PHEV sales, particularly in China, where they increased by 80% in 2023 – a far bigger increase than by battery electric cars, which saw sales rise by over 20%. There are several underlying reasons, the most important of which is that PHEV powertrains largely overcome range anxiety by combining the benefits of both conventional engines and EVs. The trend in China is also attributed in part to the introduction of new PHEV models, given that the market was previously dominated by battery electric models. Despite playing a strong role in the EV mix in the short term, sales of PHEVs are likely to drop rapidly after 2030 as an increasing number of more affordable battery electric models becomes available and as advances in battery technology and the rollout of charging infrastructure alleviate range anxiety. However, the critical factor for PHEVs is how consumers operate them. Studies have shown that electric mode use typically accounts for between 20% and 40% of the annual mileage . Incentives such as access to lowemissions zones for PHEVs operating solely in electric mode, along with government efforts to ensure affordable electricity prices, could boost the use of electric mode in PHEVs. Employing electric mode usage as a factor, we constructed two sensitivity cases with different oil demand trends: a more electric mode operation case which increases the current levels of electric propulsion by over 30 percentage points by 2035, and a less electric mode operation case which holds the proportion of PHEV electric propulsion at current levels. In the case where electric mode use stagnates, PHEVs lead to an increase in oil demand by around 100 thousand barrels per day  by 2035 in the case where electric propulsion increases, oil demand declines by 250 kb/d over the same period. Oil remains an important part of the electricity mix in the Middle East. The region currently consumes around 1,7 mb/d of oil every year in the power sector alone, equivalent to the total oil demand of Indonesia. Around 340 terawatt hours  were generated by oil fired power plants in 2023, providing 25% of total electricity supply in the region. The largest user of oil fired power in the Middle East is Saudi Arabia, generating nearly half of the total in 2022: it is home to the world’s largest oil fired plant, which consumes around 200 kb/d on peak days. Other major users of oil fired power are Iran  Kuwait , Iraq , Syria  and Lebanon . There is much uncertainty, however, about the amount of oil that will be used in the electricity sector in the Middle East over the next decade. While electricity demand is projected to rise rapidly, the largest users of oil in power are making efforts to shift away from oil to natural gas and renewable energy sources. For instance, the Vision 2030 programme in Saudi Arabia aims to phase out oil for power generation by 2030, though specific plans to achieve this objective have not yet been established. High dependence on oil in the power sector is a point of concern to many countries in the region, and consideration is being given to how to reduce its use. For example, in Iraq, where there has been recent progress in switching to natural gas and where there are ambitions to increase the availability of natural gas for power through the elimination of flaring before 2030. Taking into consideration these policies and factors, Middle East oil demand in the power sector declines by about 900 kb/d to 2030 in the STEPS, while natural gas demand in the power sector increases by over 40 billion cubic metres  and renewable electricity generation increases sixfold. In a case where transitions away from oil are delayed in Saudi Arabia, Iraq and other countries in the region, oil use in the power sector could decline by less than it does in the STEPS, and in consequence oil demand could be some 500 kb/d higher in 2030 than in the STEPS. On the other hand, in a case where transitions away from oil proceed more quickly than in the STEPS, including through more rapid switching to natural gas and renewables, oil use in the power sector could be further reduced by around 250 kb/d in 2030 compared to the STEPS. While global natural gas demand increases by about 250 bcm from 2023 to a peak of 4 400 bcm in the late 2020s in the STEPS, global gas markets remain well supplied. A wave of new LNG supply coming to market, together with other factors, applies downward pressure on the price of LNG exports in the STEPS . The response to these price reductions is uncertain and could lead to global natural gas demand increasing faster than projected in the STEPS in order to clear available supply. We find that the LNG surplus of around 130 bcm in 2030 in the STEPS could lead to higher demand for natural gas, with some of it being used for electricity generation, heating and industry. This would displace the fuels that would otherwise have been used, such as oil in power, coal in industry and electricity in buildings, including heat pumps. In addition, we analyse the implications for natural gas demand related to uncertainties in the pace of renewables deployment and electricity demand growth. Combining these uncertainties, we find that the effects would see a peak within a few years of that for the STEPS , although there are circumstances that could see growth beyond this range . On the other hand, faster solar PV deployment and lower electricity demand growth could see an earlier peak in natural gas demand and a more significant decline to 2030 and 2035. In the STEPS, LNG demand increases by 145 bcm between 2023 and 2030, while export capacity expands by around 270 bcm, loosening global gas markets . This puts downward pressure on natural gas prices, which in the STEPS average around USD 6,5 per million British thermal units  in the European Union in 2030, USD 7/MBtu in China and around USD 8/MBtu in Japan. This is almost half the levels seen in the European Union in 2023, and about 35% lower in China and Japan. Existing LNG export capacity and new capacity under construction is sufficient to meet projected demand in the STEPS until 2040. This suggests that no further projects are required in the near term to satisfy demand for LNG. Compared with previous waves of LNG supply growth, there are now fewer buyers that are obliged to take volumes of gas on long term take or pay contracts. Around one third of the capacity under construction is as yet uncontracted, meaning these additional volumes will be made available on the spot market from suppliers or portfolio players with equity stakes in the terminals. With the increasing liquidity and flexibility of global LNG supply, there is a high degree of uncertainty about which markets and sectors have the capacity to absorb these additional volumes of gas. This is compounded by uncertainties about production: in some cases, this might fall faster than anticipated, for example Bangladesh or Thailand, and in others it might surprise on the upside, for example in China. On the import side, there is significant LNG regasification capacity of around 1 500 bcm today – more than double the amount of export capacity – and a further 200 bcm is being built. Around 40% of the new capacity is being built in China. Europe is also increasing its ability to import LNG and by 2030 its regasification capacity is set to reach 370 bcm per year, which is 50% higher than it was before Russia invaded Ukraine. Overall, there are relatively few infrastructure related constraints to increasing LNG use, barring some bottlenecks to reach new centres of gas demand in India. We explored a sensitivity case where the LNG surplus and the resulting downward pressure on prices in the STEPS stimulates additional demand above the level in the STEPS of around 75 bcm by 2030. This additional demand raises overall LNG capacity utilisation from 80% in the STEPS in 2030 to 90%, closer to current levels of around 95%. Most of the incremental volume comes from existing projects in the United States, with the remainder supplied principally by Canada, Qatar and exporters in Nigeria and Mozambique. The upward adjustment to demand pulls forward the date at which new LNG export capacity is needed. Whereas in the STEPS, current projects are able to meet demand to 2040, in this sensitivity case a supply gap opens in the mid 2030s and around 60 bcm of new capacity is required by 2040. There are several potential sources of this incremental supply, but many face challenges. Current projects in East Africa have been delayed by security concerns, while difficulties developing upstream resources have tempered export capacity growth in West Africa and Australia. Russian LNG supply growth is meanwhile hobbled by sanctions, while possible projects in other countries with export ambitions, such as Saudi Arabia, are at a very early stage of development. On the other hand, Qatar and the United States, which dominate today’s pipeline of new projects, look well placed to develop more capacity in the long term. Canada and Argentina are also in a strong position to ramp up gas exports now that they are completing planned infrastructure to transport gas from inland fields to coastal terminals. The power sector is the largest user of natural gas, consuming about 40% of the total in 2023. Any changes in power sector demand for natural gas could therefore have a significant effect on overall natural gas demand. Two of the most important potential changes that could raise natural gas use in the power sector are an acceleration in the pace of electricity demand growth  and delays or reductions in expansion of renewables. We find that changes of this kind, together with increased oil to gas switching in the Middle East, could raise natural gas demand in the power sector by 100 bcm in 2030. The majority of that increase would be in gas importing countries, which together would take up a significant portion of the LNG surplus. In our analysis, the effects are largest in China, the European Union and Southeast Asia, though there are also smaller effects in many other countries . Among exporting countries, these uncertainties would affect natural gas demand in the power sector the most in the United States, followed by countries in the Middle East. There are of course many other uncertainties in the power sector. For example, there could be significant policy changes, such as additional measures in some countries to accelerate transitions away from coal fired power, or a change of position on nuclear power. There could also be more coal to gas switching in the power sector than projected in the STEPS if gas prices were to fall to levels below those projected. However, we have had to be selective in choosing uncertainties for consideration, and these fall outside the scope of this analysis. In the power sector, uncertainties concerning the pace of expansion for wind power are especially relevant for gas demand. In the STEPS, global wind power is projected to increase rapidly and to double by 2030: these projections reflect policy support for wind power in over 60 countries, widespread resource availability and proven low cost technology. The link between wind power and natural gas use in the power sector is particularly important in the European Union and the United States, regions where the wind industry has recently faced challenges, creating some uncertainty about the pace at which deployment is likely to be scaled up in the coming years. The main challenges are from supply chain issues, permitting and licensing hold ups, grid connection queues, and with tightening profit margins due to fixed price contracts and increases in equipment costs. Onshore wind development is most affected by the challenges arising from permitting, licensing and grid queues, and offshore wind by those arising in the supply chain and related financial challenges. A number of US offshore projects were cancelled or delayed in 2023, which are already reflected in the STEPS, but the challenges for offshore wind could last longer than projected. There has also been a reduction in the level of participation in recent wind power auctions in the European Union. Such uncertainties could reduce expansion of wind power to 2035 by almost 20% in the United States, and almost 15% in the European Union, cutting installed wind capacity in 2035 by nearly 80 gigawatts  . The impact of delayed deployment of wind power in the United States would be an extra 23 bcm of natural gas demand in 2030 and over 30 bcm in 2035, while in the European Union it would lead to an extra 7 bcm of gas demand in 2030 and 9 bcm in 2035. The solar industry faces some of the same challenges, including grid connection queues and permitting and licensing problems in some instances, but its supply chains are in a stronger state. Additional growth for electricity demand could also raise the level of natural gas demand in the power sector. In advanced economies, a faster rise in electricity demand that outstripped the growth of renewables would be likely to prompt turning to natural gas to fill the gap. In emerging market and developing economies, where coal is the primary source of electricity, a faster than expected increase in electricity demand would lead to additional use of coal, but it would also mean a search for additional natural gas in many instances, particularly in Southeast Asia. As discussed, the extent of oil to gas switching in the Middle East is another major uncertainty. We have also assessed the potential for a larger response from the industry sector to lower natural gas price resulting from the LNG surplus. Lower prices could lead to faster displacement of coal and oil boilers by natural gas in China, India and Southeast Asia without changing the rate of electrification. In non energy intensive industry, where most of this displacement occurs, the average rate of replacement for natural gas boilers increases to 2,3% per year in the sensitivity case compared with 0,6% in the STEPS by 2030. This results in gas demand increasing by 23 bcm in 2030 compared to the STEPS, displacing 13 million tonnes of coal equivalent  of coal demand and 0,3 mb/d of oil demand. We assume that distribution infrastructure is able to meet this additional demand, though that may be challenging in some cases, notably in India and Southeast Asia. Lower natural gas prices in the years ahead could also lead to larger increases in demand for natural gas for ammonia production as a result of existing coal based production plants in China and Southeast Asia being converted to gas faster than projected in the STEPS, though the effect on gas demand is much smaller than that arising from the displacement of oil and gas boilers in industry. In the sensitivity case, this switch results in additional gas demand of around 3 bcm for ammonia production by 2030, which displaces another 4 Mtce of coal demand. Lower natural gas prices could also have a larger impact on the buildings sector by delaying moves away from gas fired heating to heat pumps. Heat pump growth slowed in 2023 as the market consolidated after a significant surge in 2022 which was probably driven by the energy crisis. Growth is expected to pick up again. The STEPS projects growth in the stock of heat pumps by two thirds by 2030. However, China and the European Union, which account for more than 40% of the current global heat pump stock, remain particularly vulnerable to the risk that the lower gas prices in the STEPS could further slow the pace of gas boiler replacements. In the sensitivity case, heat pump sales could be reduced by 20% in the European Union and China, resulting in a 10% reduction in stock by 2030 compared with the STEPS: this increases gas demand by 14 bcm, displacing 50 TWh of electricity by 2030. Solar PV deployment is a major success story in global clean energy transitions. Installed solar capacity has roughly doubled every three years since 2015, and this increase has been accompanied by similar expansion in solar PV manufacturing capacity. Existing solar PV module manufacturing capacities are more than sufficient to produce over 900 GW of solar PV modules, which is the level of capacity additions required in the NZE Scenario by 2030 announcements of planned new capacity would increase this to almost 1 400 GW, or more than 50% above the NZE Scenario level, assuming that these plans proceed. Existing overcapacity has contributed to a 90% reduction in solar PV costs since 2010, but it has also put at risk the competitiveness of the industry, with the STEPS projecting a utilisation rate for solar module manufacturing of just 50% by 2030. If manufacturing overcapacity persists, there is potential for a larger response to the low solar PV costs projected in the STEPS, with even faster solar PV growth, especially in emerging market and developing economies, despite challenging financing conditions. In this sensitivity case, we assess to what extent such an acceleration might displace fossil fuel power plants, and what the impact of would be. We project that solar PV capacity additions might increase by 60 GW in 2030 compared to the STEPS, which would mean an average 55% utilisation rate for manufacturing capacity. This would reduce natural gas fired power generation by 180 TWh in 2030 and about 330 TWh in 2035, saving close to 40 bcm and almost 70 bcm of natural gas respectively, alongside reductions for coal fired power. In the modelling, two thirds of the reductions in natural gas use by 2035 are in China and Southeast Asia, where solar PV manufacturing capacity is concentrated, and the other third in countries in Africa. Faster solar PV deployment would also cut coal fired power in many regions. The combined effect of these changes would bring an additional 280 million tonnes of carbon dioxide  emissions reductions in 2035 compared with the STEPS. Uncertainties concerning the pace of electricity demand growth could vary the level of natural gas demand in the power sector. Global electricity demand could be reduced by as much as 2%, in turn reducing the global demand for natural gas by around 50 bcm in 2030 . About two thirds of this demand reduction would likely take place in emerging market and developing economies, where the uncertainties for electricity demand growth are largest, and would principally affect India and Southeast Asia, with more modest impacts in the Middle East, Africa and China. While advanced economies are more reliant on gas fired power, the uncertainties they face about electricity demand growth are more circumscribed. The sensitivity case nevertheless sees a decline in demand for natural gas of around 30 bcm compared with the STEPS as a result of uncertainties about the speed of growth in electricity demand for EVs, appliances and data centres. This principally affects the United States, which sees demand fall by almost 17 bcm compared with the STEPS, with most of the rest of the reduction in the European Union. Electricity demand in the STEPS increases at an annual average rate of 3% from 2023 to 2035. Many of the key drivers relate to emerging market and developing economies, where rising populations and incomes result in higher levels of demand as more buildings are constructed and as more people buy and use appliances and air conditioners. Demand for cooling has already led to a rapid rise in the sale and use of air conditioners, which is expected to continue. Heat waves are likely to become more frequent and intense with climate change, increasing both the demand for and costs of cooling . Data centres are another cause of rising electricity demand, linked in part to expanding use of AI. With these drivers in mind, we evaluated key uncertainties related to data centre demand, appliance efficiency and heat waves, together with EV growth . Our sensitivity case finds that, in aggregate, the average annual growth rate from 2023 to 2035 moves up to 3,4% in the high case and down to 2,7% in the low case. While shifts of this size would be important, they would not deflect the continuing and inexorable rise of electricity demand. Meeting higher electricity demand has near term implications in our sensitivity case for both gas fired and coal fired power, particularly the latter, which in the modelling would see demand rise by 4% at the global level in 2030 . In early 2024, over 11 000 data centres were registered worldwide. The number of servers installed increased around 4% per year between 2010 and 2020, but data centre electricity demand broadly plateaued as increasing information technology  demands were mitigated by efficiency improvements in cooling and by workloads moving to larger and more efficient cloud data centres. In recent years, however, electricity consumption has picked up as efficiency improvements have been outpaced by surging demand for data centre services. Data centre electricity consumption was estimated in 2022 to be in the range of 240 to 340 TWh, around 1% to 1,3% of total electricity consumption . Although AI currently accounts for a relatively small share of global data centre electricity consumption, it is emerging as a new driver of growth. Investment in AI and new data centres is booming. The global venture capital sector has invested over USD 225 billion in AI startups over the past five years, compared to USD 143 billion over the same period in startups operating across all aspects of the clean energy sector. Driven in part by data centres and AI, capital spending by US technology giants Alphabet , Meta , Amazon and Microsoft reached around USD 150 billion in 2023, up by more than a factor of two on the 2019 level and equivalent to around 0,5% of US gross domestic product. Interest is not confined to advanced economies, with China, India and other emerging market and developing economies also seeing robust growth in data centres. A substantial increase in electricity consumption from data centres appears inevitable . However, several factors make projections challenging. First, the supply chain is highly concentrated around a few bottlenecks, particularly for the chips that handle AI and other compute intensive workloads. Taiwan Semiconductor, which holds more than a 90% share of the market for AI related chips, has announced investments to meet expected demand for their most advanced chips, and plans to open new factories in 2026, but it is currently limited to existing infrastructure. Average lead times for new chip fabrication plants are 3 5 years. Second, efficiency gains are hard to model. They have recently been substantial: NVIDIA's Blackwell Platform cut energy consumption by around 75% compared to the previous generation of graphics processing unit  chips. In addition, there is potential for algorithmic optimisation to reduce future computational load. However, more efficient chips may also increase demand due to the rebound effect, and energy efficiency improvements appear unlikely to fully offset the growing service demands due in part to AI. Third, any or all of the electricity network, generation capacity and permitting processes may constrain the rate of data centre expansion. There are also policy related uncertainties. On one hand, governments have enacted industrial and localisation policies to support development of domestic value chains for chips and data centres. On the other hand, trade restrictions on key physical components, for example certain chips and chip tools, at the global level, or data centre construction limits at the local level, could slow developments. Furthermore, data availability presents substantial challenges for analysts to assess the outlook for data centre electricity demand, in contrast to other more traditional parts of the energy system, where data collection processes are more standardised. The evolution of demand for data centres and AI services is thus highly uncertain. Major investment in AI startups and computing resources are being made, but the nature, speed and scale of end use adoption is still unclear. For these reasons, projections should be made with caution, using a scenario based approach and putting results in the context of the broader energy sector Total electricity demand across all sectors is set to increase by around 6 760 TWh by 2030 in the STEPS, equivalent to more than the electricity demand of the European Union and the United States combined in 2023. The main drivers of this increase are the electrification of transport, industrial processes and space heating, and rising demand for appliances and cooling equipment. In the STEPS, about 80% of additional electricity demand for 2023 2030 is in emerging market and developing economies. Data centre demand grows strongly but provides a relatively small contribution to overall electricity demand growth . Driven by the rising demand for both AI and more conventional data centre services, global server capacity is expected to more than double by 2030. After a decade of substantial technical efficiency improvements and on the back of an increase in more energy intensive data centre workloads, notably for AI, the rate of technical efficiency gains is expected to flatten  . Consequently, global data centre electricity demand is anticipated to increase significantly by the end of this decade, with the scale dependent on technological advances in IT equipment and hardware deployment. In the base case, data centres account for less than 10% of total electricity demand growth at the global level, which is roughly on a par with demand growth for desalination, and less than a third of the demand growth for both EVs and space cooling in the buildings sector. Therefore, growth of electricity demand for data centres is projected to be rapid, but the level looks set to remain relatively small in the context of overall global demand growth. Nevertheless, data centre operators are now among the most active clean electricity purchasers as clean electricity supply becomes central to their sustainability strategies . The top ten corporate buyers of clean energy power purchase agreements  in 2023 included Amazon, Meta, Alphabet and Microsoft. Between 2023 and 2030, total data centre demand growth is projected to be just below 50% of the annual global increase in low emissions sources of electricity over the last five years, so meeting this demand growth sustainably is feasible. However, data centres are very spatially concentrated, and constraints on generation and grid capacity may be more severe at the local level . The clustering of data centres is driven by the benefits of proximity to infrastructure such as fibre optic cables and power resources to customers, particularly those with a need for nearreal time access to data, like financial services companies and to existing business ecosystems and talent pools. Location decisions are also driven by incentives and regulation, and by climatic considerations: cooler places have lower cooling needs. Spatial concentration is already creating tensions, with several jurisdictions issuing moratoria on further data centre development or taking steps to restrict it. Overall, significant electricity demand increase from data centres is inevitable, but the extent of growth is uncertain. In any likely scenario, however, data centres look set to remain a relatively small driver of overall electricity demand growth at the global level in the decade to come. Nonetheless, constraints at the local level may be significant. To ensure that the outlook for data centre demand growth is better understood and that actual growth is met sustainably, policy makers, the energy industry and the technology sector need to work more closely together to enhance data sharing, strengthen regulatory dialogue, improve efficiencies, scale up low emissions electricity supply and mitigate local bottlenecks. Global temperatures are rising as the climate changes, and 2023 was the warmest year on record. In addition to climatological shifts and their impact on the average global surface temperature, there has been an increased prevalence of extreme temperatures in the form of more intense, frequent and persistent heat waves, some of which have led to notable temperature records. Recent examples include highs of almost 50 degrees Celsius  over three days in western Canada , highs exceeding 40 °C in the United Kingdom , and extended heat waves over much of India during May/June 2024 and parts of China in August 2024. One consequence of more intense, frequent and longer heat waves is expected to be an increase in ownership of air conditioners. Consumers buy units to stay cool in high temperatures and to be prepared for expected future heatwaves. For example, heat waves in India during 2024 are understood to have prompted a doubling of air conditioner sales. As conditions get hotter, air conditioners are used more often, and they also have to work harder to keep buildings and people cool. Space cooling is already one of the fastest growing sources of electricity demand and it plays a significant role in increasing the level of peak demand for electricity . The combination of increased use and ownership is cumulative and accelerates electricity demand growth. The energy demand curve also shifts with higher peak consumption levels that could jeopardise system security. For the sensitivity case, we considered a world where more frequent, more intense and longer heat waves mean that levels of cooling demand in aggregate are higher than in the STEPS. It concentrates on what cooling from high temperatures would mean for electricity demand. We assessed heat waves by considering the historic distribution of cooling degree days and assuming more periods in the higher, hotter end of the spread. In addition, we factored in an accelerated pace of air conditioner ownership acquisition. The results indicate that electricity demand would be around 500 TWh higher in 2030 in this sensitivity case, compared to the STEPS, and almost 700 TWh higher in 2035, which is around 20% of total cooling demand in the buildings sector in that year in the STEPS . More than 80% of the electricity demand increase compared to the STEPS occurs in emerging market and developing economies, notably India, China and Southeast Asia, due to their climate and their relatively low air conditioner ownership rates, and cooling demand increases by an average of 25% compared to the STEPS. In advanced economies, cooling demand increases by just over 10% since air conditioner ownership is already near saturation levels in regions in which it is needed. We find that average air conditioner ownership rates would be 16% higher in 2035, a level not seen until after 2040 in the STEPS, which drives 70% of the demand increase. In most regions, this demand increase has to be met by additional dispatchable generation because cooling demand is concentrated in a few months of the year. Since this type of generation is heavily reliant on fossil fuels, gas and coal consumption would each increase by 2% by 2030, resulting in 270 Mt of additional CO2 emissions. Acquisition and use of an expanding array of electrical appliances and cooling equipment is a key driver of rising electricity consumption in fast growing emerging market and developing economies in the STEPS . Energy consumption in the buildings sector from space cooling and appliances is set to increase in the STEPS by 35% to 2030 and 60% by 2035. This is primarily driven by growth in population and floorspace, increased ownership of appliances and improved living standards. Energy efficiency improvements, supported by strong policy measures, can help to moderate this growth which is reflected in the STEPS. Rates of efficiency improvements, however, have varied widely in the past across emerging market and developing economies as a result of differing policies and standards together with uneven implementation, and the scope for efficiency improvements is at risk of being severely curtailed by the continued sale of obsolete and inefficient air conditioners and other appliances in some emerging market and developing economies. Without appropriate standards, regulation and effective enforcement, consumers could be locked into old, inefficient technologies for many years. The difficulty of assessing the scale of future energy efficiency improvements against this background creates potential uncertainties for the STEPS projections which we have analysed in the following cases. Markets with strong minimum energy performance standards  only cover a limited share of global demand for cooling appliances. This provides incentives for appliance manufacturers to maintain distinct product ranges for those countries with MEPS and those without, or to specialise in less efficient products with cheaper upfront costs. Our high demand case assumes that, for the end uses considered, weak or delayed efficiency policies reduce the rate of efficiency improvement by one third. The effect of this is to increase electricity demand in the buildings sector in emerging market and developing economies by 170 TWh by 2030 and 340 TWh by 2035, compared to the STEPS, which is equivalent to 3% to 5% of cooling and appliances demand. The impact is amplified over time by economic growth and increased appliance ownership. There are wide regional disparities, with India seeing the largest impact from poor air conditioner efficiency at about 30% of the total increase in electricity demand . In the low demand case, the number of markets with strong MEPS expands to reach critical mass, so that international companies choose to comply with standards across all their global operations in order to avoid the costs of maintaining separate product ranges for markets with MEPS and those without, and manufacturers specialising in inefficient goods are gradually squeezed out. As a result, more efficient appliances are rolled out worldwide. Our low demand case assumes that widespread MEPS and efficiency labelling lead to efficiency levels equivalent to those in the APS. This results in electricity demand 400 TWh lower in 2030 than in the STEPS, and almost 900 TWh lower by 2035, equating to 13% of cooling and appliances demand in the buildings sector. Highly efficient standards benefit China the most, due to its economic development and high growth in ownership rates, and it accounts for almost 45% of the demand reduction. Meeting higher or lower electricity demand growth than projected in the STEPS has implications for the supply of electricity that vary by region related to the available fleet of power plants. The operations of existing power plants could be varied in many cases to meet higher or lower electricity demand, though new construction could be needed to meet higher electricity demand that persists, while lower demand could lead to earlier retirements of some power plants. In the short term, faster electricity demand growth would be met largely by operating existing power plants more often, in particular coaland natural gas fired power plants. In advanced economies, this would generally mean higher levels of natural gas fired power. In some cases, higher demand may also require new power capacity to ensure that peak demand can be met. In the STEPS, the average capacity factor of natural gas fired power plants in advanced economies declines from 36% in 2023 to 31% in 2030 and 26% in 2035. If they had to meet the higher demand seen in the sensitivity case, the average capacity factor for gas fired power plants would still decline over time, but it would do so at a slower rate. In emerging market and developing economies, the large fleet of coal fired power plants is capable of significantly increasing output to meet higher levels of demand. However, even with the additional electricity demand growth explored here, the average capacity factor of coal fired power in emerging market and developing economies still declines from 2023 to 2030, even though coal fired power generation is 4% higher in 2030 than in the STEPS. In the longer term, new renewables capacity could be built by the late 2020s and early 2030s to meet nearly 85% of higher electricity demand. As solar PV and wind are already the cheapest new sources of electricity in most regions today, it is likely that they would be deployed to meet persistently higher levels of electricity demand, thus mitigating the additional total output from coaland natural gas fired power plants . Lower growth in electricity demand would drive faster reductions of fossil fuels to 2030 and beyond. Natural gas fired power in 2030 is 4% lower in this sensitivity case than in the STEPS, and coal fired power is 4,5% lower, while oil use in the power sector is largely unchanged. Collectively, the changes in fossil fuel fired power would reduce CO2 emissions by 520 Mt in 2030. Renewables, nuclear power and other low emissions sources are largely unchanged by lower electricity demand growth. Many countries have targets to increase installed capacity or the low emissions share of generation based on specific electricity demand expectations. Where electricity demand growth turns out to be lower, we project that most of those countries are likely to choose to overshoot their share targets rather than to seek to slow deployment of renewables. Each of our scenarios has different implications for security, affordability and sustainability. These are the elements examined in detail in this chapter. The three objectives are rarely in perfect alignment, and policy makers often face choices and trade offs between them. But neither are they necessarily in opposition to one another and there are many policy choices that can simultaneously attain all three. What can be said with some confidence is that the way policies are designed is key to striking a balance between these objectives. Energy security is the focus of the first part of this chapter. Energy security means having uninterrupted energy available at an affordable price. That in turn means ensuring reliable sources of supply and designing and maintaining infrastructure and systems that are resilient against physical and cyber threats. Alongside traditional risks to fuel security, issues could arise during energy transitions, not least in the power sector, given increasing electricity demand and a shift to more variable generation, and in clean energy supply chains, given concerns about market concentration and an excessive reliance on a small number of suppliers. Each scenario has some distinctive risks. The trajectories that we map may in some ways understate the difficulties that lie ahead. Our scenarios depict smooth, orderly processes, in which markets, investment, technologies and policies evolve in a consistent way. This is not how the energy system operates in practice. The future is likely to be characterised by competing interests, market imbalances, stop and go policies and bouts of volatility and turbulence, just as the past has been. People centred aspects of energy transitions are the focus in the second section. Public acceptance is a critical factor for the pace and consistency of energy transitions. In this context, the impact of transitions on energy affordability, on jobs and livelihoods, and on the ability to access energy services is particularly important. This section provides an overview of how energy transitions are affecting people, and how they are affected by people’s choices. It covers energy access and affordability, energy employment and changing consumer behaviours, highlighting how these people centred aspects look today, and how they could evolve in the years ahead. Efforts to tackle climate change is the focus of the third section. It details emissions of carbon dioxide  and methane associated with each scenario and looks at the extent to which they could exacerbate climate change. In addition to the implications of each scenario for the rise in global average temperatures, it considers the substantial variations in outcomes for air quality and the consequent effects on public health. The indispensable role of investment in safeguarding all the elements discussed in earlier sections wraps up this chapter. It examines recent trends in capital flows to the energy sector, looks at sources of investment and financing, and assesses their adequacy in relation to the requirements of the scenarios. Energy security is a “foundational and central mission” for the International Energy Agency , in the words of the communiqué adopted by ministers at the IEA 50th anniversary meeting in 2024. The concept of energy security has evolved over the years since the IEA was created in response to the first oil shock in the 1970s. Assessing energy security now requires a comprehensive approach that encompasses not only traditional risks but also risks that could emerge because of the impacts of climate change and the momentum behind clean energy transitions. The IEA response to recent turbulence in energy markets provides an illustration of the multiple issues in play. In 2022, following Russia’s full scale invasion of Ukraine, the IEA undertook the two largest ever co ordinated emergency oil stock releases in its history to help prevent shortfalls in global supplies. At the same time, within days of the Russian invasion, the IEA released a ten point plan showing how the European Union could rapidly reduce its reliance on natural gas supplies from Russia, including by accelerating deployment of clean energy technologies. Although the crisis had a very specific cause, it highlighted the general risk of excessive reliance on a single source of energy from a single producer, and the benefits that diversity can bring for energy security. With this principle in mind, the IEA has also been paying close attention to the resilience and diversity of clean energy supply chains, including security risks affecting the supply of critical minerals that are essential for many clean energy technologies. Traditional risks to oil and gas security show few signs of abating and continue to be a central preoccupation for the IEA, even as these risks evolve during energy transitions. As the world moves towards a more renewables rich energy system, some aspects of energy security will improve, but new hazards are also emerging. For example, a more digitalised and electrified world means that cybersecurity and electricity security have become critical concerns for policy makers around the world. Lasting energy security is not just about increasing the supply of power and fuels, and ensuring that adequate and resilient infrastructure and systems are in place. It is also about using energy more efficiently. Better materials and insulation, newer technologies and more efficient appliances significantly reduce the energy needed to heat, cool and light our homes and workplaces. In addition, it is about minimising CO2 and methane emissions. It is sometimes claimed that policy makers need to choose between energy security and climate action. There are indeed some potential trade offs, which we discuss in this section. But failure to act on emissions increases the risks to energy security, not least because the physical consequences of a changing climate pose a threat to the reliability of the global energy infrastructure and trade flows. A comprehensive approach to energy security needs to include major reductions in the energy related emissions that are creating risks to energy supplies, as well as efforts to make energy systems more climate resilient. The position of oil and natural gas markets today is very different from just a few years ago. Before the Covid 19 pandemic, global spare crude oil production capacity, excluding Iran and Russia, averaged less than 3 million barrels per day  today it stands at close to 6 mb/d. During the global energy crisis, after gas exports to Europe from Russia were cut, natural gas markets were so tight that a 2022 explosion and fire at a liquefied natural gas  terminal in Texas with 20 billion cubic metres  capacity, close to 20% of US LNG capacity, caused wholesale natural gas prices to jump in much of Europe by more than 10% and in the United Kingdom by more than 20%. Although the European natural gas market remains fragile, markets are now less tight, around 270 bcm of new LNG capacity is set to become available in the next few years, increasing global available liquefaction capacity by close to 50% by 2030 . Previous editions of the World Energy Outlook  warned of a risk of underinvestment in oil and natural gas in a Stated Policies Scenario like trajectory for demand, noting a gap between the amounts being invested in oil and gas and the future requirements of this scenario. This risk appears to have receded. Oil and gas investment has risen by around 30% since 2021, while estimates of future investment have come down as projected oil and gas demand levels have moderated. However, there is no room for complacency: unexpected outages or other events could drastically change the supply demand balance. In the Stated Policies Scenario  in this WEO, oil and natural gas demand both peak before 2030 and decline slowly thereafter. Investment in both new and existing fields is needed in the STEPS to avoid volatile markets and prices, but the level of investment in oil and gas supply in 2024  is around 20% more than what is invested in 2035 in this scenario. Increases in oil production in a number of non OPEC producers, including the United States, Brazil, Argentina and Guyana, push the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries  share of the market down to around 33% in 2030, a level not seen since the late 1980s. After 2030, the OPEC share of the oil market starts to rise again. In the Announced Pledges Scenario  and Net Zero Emissions by 2050  Scenario, oil and natural gas demand peak earlier and then fall at a much faster rate. Investment in oil and gas in the APS in 2035 amounts to some USD 490 billion, which is around 40% lower than today, and in the NZE Scenario it is USD 250 billion, which is 70% lower. In these scenarios, many new projects face major commercial risks, and some may fail to recover their upfront costs. If all LNG projects under construction are developed, the global average utilisation rates of LNG plants would fall from around 95% of capacity today to 75% by 2035 in the APS and to less than 45% in the NZE Scenario, much lower than the 90% utilisation rate in the STEPS. There is sometimes a debate about whether the emphasis should be placed on demand side or supply side actions in pushing forwards towards net zero emissions. In practice, rapid and sustained progress towards net zero emissions depends on tackling both supply and demand in an integrated way. In the APS and the NZE Scenario, reductions in fossil fuel investment are synchronised with reductions in demand, notably through efficiency gains, and with rapid scaling up of investment in clean energy. This approach offers the prospect of rapid progress while minimising price volatility and security risks. For example, the nearly 75% reduction in investment in fossil fuel production in the NZE Scenario between 2023 and 2035 is only consistent with maintaining reliable energy supplies on the assumption of a 2,5 fold increase in clean energy investment over the same period . This scenario requires policies that focus both on scaling up the supply and demand of clean energy and on scaling back the supply and demand of fossil fuels. Policies and measures focussing on reducing fossil fuel demand and supply play a particularly important role in ensuring that the energy transition is achieved in a just, orderly and equitable way. Examples include policies that focus on the early retirement or conversion of fossil fuel assets, such as coal fired power plants or long lived industrial facilities, or that focus on providing clear signals to markets about the desired direction of travel, such as bans on the sale of fossil fuel equipment. Inclusive dialogue between industry, labour, communities and governments – including between producer and consumer countries – are also essential to help inform coherent energy investment planning and to maximise opportunities for socio economic development from the transition. Supply focussed fossil fuel policies include those that reduce the emissions intensity of oil and gas supply or put in place arrangements for the safe and responsible decommissioning of fossil fuel infrastructure when it is no longer needed. These policies also have a part to play in avoiding the unplanned, chaotic or premature retirement of existing fossil fuel infrastructure where this could have negative consequences for the reliability of the overall system. Ample spare crude oil capacity and the upcoming wave of new LNG supplies provide buffers against the risk of sharp price shocks, but the security of fuel supplies is far from guaranteed, not least because the effectiveness of this capacity to address any shortfalls that may arise hinges on the ability of alternative sources of supply to reach an affected country or region quickly. Without both resilient and reliable sources of energy and infrastructure to transport supply to customers, local or regional disruptions remain a distinct possibility in the face of risks from geopolitical tensions, technical failures and extreme weather events. These impacts are likely to be felt more acutely in import dependent countries. For example, for importers in Asia – including Japan, Korea, and developing Asia – oil and gas import dependency increases in aggregate in all scenarios, while the share of oil and gas in total energy demand falls. In the STEPS, oil import dependency for these countries rises from 80% today to close to 90% in 2050, and gas import dependency increases from 40% today to 60% by 2050 . Petrochemical demand in Asia as a whole is one of the key drivers of oil demand and imports . The Middle East is the world’s largest oil exporter today and this remains the case in all scenarios. It is also responsible for around one third of the increase in LNG supplies in the STEPS to 2035. The Middle East Asia route is therefore set to remain an essential artery for seaborne trade in oil and gas. As a result, consumers in Asia are exposed to the risk that geopolitical events in the Middle East or accidents near major trade chokepoints could lead to physical shortages of supply, as well as price volatility. Key maritime trade routes remain vital to the well being of global oil and gas markets, but they depend on safe passage through places such as the Strait of Hormuz and the Strait of Malacca. Today some 80% of crude oil imported into East Asian countries passes through the Strait of Malacca, and more than half of it flows through the Strait of Hormuz. The Strait of Malacca is mounting in importance, and oil and gas volumes flowing through it are set to increase from 24 mb/d and 70 bcm today to 28 mb/d and 140 bcm in 2050 in the STEPS, cementing its position as the largest chokepoint for global oil and LNG trade . The complete closure of the Strait of Hormuz, while unlikely, would block off around 20 mb/d of crude oil and oil products, or around 20% of global oil supply, together with the vast majority of OPEC spare production capacity. Around 20% of global LNG trade also flows through the Strait of Hormuz, and any action that blocked this would similarly be highly damaging for natural gas markets. For producer economies, energy transitions create a powerful incentive to accelerate the pace of economic and energy sector reforms while at the same time reducing a major source of revenue that could finance these reforms. Just ten established producer economies in the Middle East, Africa and Latin America currently produce more than 30 mb/d of oil and nearly 800 bcm of natural gas annually, and their income from oil and gas sales in 2035 falls by 30% in the APS and by 70% in the NZE Scenario from the average annual level seen between 2010 and 2023. The consequences of reductions in oil and gas revenue of the kind seen in these scenarios would fall most heavily on producers, but they could affect consumers as well. If a major producer were to struggle to withstand the strains placed on its fiscal balances, there is a risk that this might at some point affect its political and economic stability, which could in turn disrupt supplies and lead to higher and more volatile prices globally. The downward spiral in Venezuela’s oil and gas sector in recent years illustrates that this is more than a theoretical possibility. The Middle East, a major fuel supplier to the global market, is particularly vulnerable to climate events, underscoring its need for more climate resilient energy infrastructure . However, the increase in frequency and severity of climate hazards such as floods, cyclones, droughts and extreme heat waves pose serious risks to energy infrastructure and threaten reliable energy supplies in all parts of the world. For example, Hurricane Ida temporarily disrupted 95% of oil and gas production in the Gulf of Mexico in the United States in 2021 and shut down many oil refining and petrochemical facilities for weeks. In the same year, exceptionally cold weather in Texas shut down some natural gas and power supplies, causing blackouts and hardship for consumers. There are also increasing risks from violent storms that could impact LNG plants and refineries, which are often located in coastal areas, and from water shortages in dry regions, which can disrupt fuel supply operations. Efforts to reduce unabated fossil fuel use and scale up clean energy need to be carefully designed, which means, among other things, trying to map interdependencies and anticipate possible feedback effects. For example, a mismatch between the rate of expansion of lowemissions electricity generation, networks and electrified end user equipment on the one hand and the decommissioning of natural gas fired plants and gas networks on the other could lead to energy security risks. It could also disproportionately affect consumers that are unable to make the higher upfront investment often needed for electric end use equipment. Some existing infrastructure has a potentially important role to play in accelerating the development of low emissions fuels. Some of these fuels, including biomethane, lowemissions hydrogen based fuels and some liquid biofuels, can make use of existing infrastructure and end use equipment. Delivery costs for others, including hydrogen, would be much lower if the existing infrastructure were to be adapted specifically for their use. Such adaptation could help a number of countries that have the potential to be major producers to export these fuels and could similarly help countries with limited domestic resources to import them, and thus reduce their reliance on fossil fuel imports, diversify their energy mix and reduce their emissions. The scale up of low emissions hydrogen in the NZE Scenario offers an illustrative example. In this scenario, around 400 million tonnes  of low emissions hydrogen equivalent are consumed globally in 2050. Around 20% of this is traded internationally, including hydrogen converted into low emissions hydrogen based fuels. Low emissions hydrogen is expensive to transport, and repurposing existing pipelines could reduce investment costs by 50 80% . Even if pipelines are repurposed in this way, new dedicated hydrogen transport infrastructure is still needed. There are currently plans to develop around 37 000 kilometres  of hydrogen pipelines globally by 2035, which is broadly in line with what is needed in the NZE Scenario. However, most of these projects are at an early stage and only a handful have reached final investment decisions, reflecting the generally slow pace of market development. It is more challenging to convert existing storage for use with hydrogen, and new facilities will be required, including depleted gas fields, hard rock caverns, salt caverns and aquifers. Overall investment in hydrogen storage is currently very low and announced projects cover only a small fraction of the needs in the NZE Scenario . Adequacy and flexibility are both critical to the stability of electricity systems. Adequacy focusses on ensuring that there is enough capacity and supply to meet peak demand, while flexibility relates to the ability to handle variations in demand and renewable energy supply and to maintain a continuous balance between electricity demand and supply. Ensuring that electricity supply and demand are always in balance also requires secure and resilient electricity networks. Electricity demand increases in all regions and scenarios over the next ten years and changing patterns of consumption have a significant impact on peak levels of demand. Anticipating peak demand growth and mitigating it where possible is key to ensuring electricity security. In the STEPS, peak demand rises by almost 15% in advanced economies to 2035, mainly because more consumers use electric heating and electric vehicles , and by up to 80% in emerging market and developing economies, most of which reflects increasing use of air conditioners and other forms of space cooling. In the APS, peak demand grows by a similar amount to the STEPS, as more electrification is compensated by higher energy efficiency gains and stronger deployment of demand side flexibility measures. Energy efficiency measures can significantly reduce peak electricity demand. Minimum energy performance standards for appliances, especially those used for cooling, improved buildings insulation and more efficient industrial motors all serve to reduce total and peak electricity demand. Demand side flexibility measures can also bolster adequacy. In the STEPS, efficiency and demand side flexibility measures mean that peak demand rises by less than 15% to 2035 in advanced economies: without these measures, peak demand would increase by more than 40% . In the APS, the widespread deployment of smart meters, dynamic tariffs and demand response enabled appliances keeps peak demand in 2035 15% below the level it would otherwise reach in advanced economies. Peak demand is similarly reduced by improved efficiency and demand side flexibility in China and other emerging market and developing economies, with efficiency gains playing an especially big role . There are other strategies to mitigate the rise in peak demand. These include increasing the capacity and number of interconnections, reinforcing existing grid infrastructure, developing new grid lines and protecting them from cyberattacks and climate related damage. In addition to helping with the management of peak demand, these measures help reduce the need to expand fossil fuel dispatchable power plants to provide system adequacy. Nonetheless, the scale of the increases in peak electricity demand seen in all regions in both the STEPS and APS means that new dispatchable capacity is required. Battery storage is the fastest growing source of short term dispatchable capacity to 2035 across all scenarios. In advanced economies, almost 600 gigawatts  of batteries are added in the STEPS to 2035, and more than 850 GW are added in the APS some new natural gas power plants are also built in both scenarios, primarily to replace existing capacity. A large amount of battery capacity is added in emerging market and developing economies, but gasand coal fired power plants also continue to play an important role in these economies. Globally in the STEPS, batteries provide 55% of new dispatchable capacity, new natural gas power plants provide 20% and new coal power plants add a further 10% to 2035 . Around 50% of these coal capacity additions are in China, 20% in India and almost 10% in Indonesia more than 50% of the total are already under construction or in the pipeline. In the APS, there is an even larger role for batteries, which provide more than half of dispatchable capacity, and 500 MW of coal capacity additions are equipped with carbon capture, utilisation and storage. There is also an important role for new nuclear plants, which provide 6% of the additional capacity that becomes available in the STEPS: the majority of which is in emerging market and developing economies, with 40% of it in China. In advanced economies, extending the life of existing reactors where feasible remains the most economical way to maintain a stable nuclear fleet that contributes to a secure and affordable supply of electricity. Flexibility needs over both short term and seasonal timeframes vary widely across regions, largely due to differences in the share of renewables and in electrification rates. In most markets, dispatchable thermal and hydropower, including pumped storage, provided nearly all short term and seasonal power system flexibility in 2023, but this is set to change. Short term electricity flexibility needs, measured here as the largest hour to hour changes in residual load , rise sharply in the STEPS over the next ten years in many parts of the world, including Europe, China, India and United States . In the period to 2050, they increase in these countries by threeto seven times more than total electricity demand, due mostly to rising shares of solar PV and wind and, to a lesser degree, evolving patterns of electricity demand. For example, short term flexibility needs in Europe increase from 30 GW in 2023 to 170 GW to 2050 while average electricity demand increases from 360 GW to 610 GW. Seasonal flexibility needs, measured as the highs and lows of residual load across the year, are driven primarily by electricity demand patterns, though the seasonality of renewable supply, notably wind and solar PV, also play a part. In Europe, seasonality is a feature of power systems today, mostly due to high heating demand in winter, and seasonal flexibility needs increase 50% faster than average electricity demand growth to 2035 in the STEPS as heating is increasingly electrified. In India, seasonal flexibility needs increase 30% faster than average electricity demand growth during the same period, where electricity demand almost doubles. Seasonal flexibility needs in India increase from a lower level than in Europe today, primarily due to strong demand growth for cooling. In China, seasonal flexibility needs increase 40% faster than average electricity demand growth to 2035 in the STEPS. In the United States, seasonal flexibility needs move broadly in line with increases in electricity demand. In the APS, more renewables and faster electrification increase the need for shortterm flexibility in all regions. Higher energy efficiency can temper the growth in the APS for the needs for seasonal flexibility. Batteries and demand side response are set to provide the majority of short term power system flexibility in both the STEPS and APS after 2035. Batteries provide short term flexibility for periods of one to eight hours, helping to improve grid stability and enabling the rapid growth of solar PV by allowing electricity generated during the day to meet demand at other times. In both the STEPS and APS, they provide around 30% of short term flexibility needs in 2035 and around 40% in 2050. Demand side response also makes a major contribution to flexibility even when it affects a relatively small fraction of overall demand . The role of thermal power plants to provide short term flexibility in power systems evolves over time. Their share of the power mix declines but as short term flexibility needs increase, they are called on to adjust their output more often and over a wider range. Downward ramping is needed during hours with high renewables output, for example in the middle of the day when solar PV production is at its peak, and upward ramping is needed when residual demand increases rapidly, for example at the end of the day when solar output declines. In the STEPS, gas fired power plants in Europe in 2050 operate below a 25% capacity factor for most of the year, but they operate above 60% three times as often as they do today . This more responsive operating mode will require upgrades to the existing dispatchable thermal fleet and measures to ensure that flexibility services are sufficiently incentivised to ensure their economic viability . Seasonal flexibility needs are mostly provided by hydropower and thermal power plants to 2035. In the STEPS, these power sources cover 90% of seasonal needs in 2035 and 75% in 2050. The curtailment of some renewables output can also be part of a cost effective approach to handle seasonal variability in power systems, and when planned for, can also help to reduce investment in other infrastructure such as electricity grids, storage and electrolysers. There is scope for electrolysers to contribute in the future to seasonal flexibility by using excess renewables generation to produce hydrogen that can be stored in long duration storage facilities. Weather patterns can vary significantly from year to year, influencing electricity demand through temperatures, and solar PV, wind generation and hydropower availability. Depending on the climate, this can lead to variations in seasonal flexibility needs, affect power plant operations and increase the variability of power system costs . Expansion of manufacturing capacities for many clean energy technologies has far exceeded the increase in clean energy technology deployment, contributing to the large drop in clean energy technology prices in recent years. For example, annual capacity additions of solar PV increased roughly fourfold between 2018 and 2023 from 100 GW to more than 420 GW while annual manufacturing capacity expanded by a factor of six from around 200 GW to 1 150 GW. Existing manufacturing capacity for solar PV modules and cells is almost sufficient to achieve what is necessary to meet demand in the NZE Scenario in 2030, with only modest gaps remaining for wafer and polysilicon manufacturing. For lithium ion batteries, existing manufacturing capacities and projects that have reached final investment decision are within reach of the deployment needs in 2030 in the NZE Scenario, if fully utilised, even without other early stage projects that are in the pipeline. For wind, existing capacity and announced projects would deliver just over 60% of 2030 deployment levels in the NZE Scenario . Manufacturing capacities are highly concentrated geographically. Owing to its supportive industrial policies, China has a very large proportion of existing manufacturing capacity for solar PV, wind, heat pumps, electrolysers and battery components. In the case of batteries, for example, China holds almost 90% of global capacity for battery cathode active materials, often a combination of lithium with nickel, cobalt and manganese, or iron phosphate, and 98% of capacity for battery anode active materials, frequently graphite or silicon doped graphite. While the project pipeline is expanding rapidly worldwide, a large portion of planned projects are being developed in the regions where most capacity is already located, with China accounting for around 90% of announced capacity additions for both cathodes and anode active materials by 2030 . The overall level of geographic concentration in manufacturing is therefore set to remain high, even if all announced projects come to fruition. The situation is somewhat different for battery cell manufacturing. The share of existing manufacturing capacity in China is slightly lower than is the case for cathodes and anodes, and planned capacity additions in Europe and the United States means this is likely to fall further. In the European Union and the United States, announced battery cell manufacturing capacity is sufficient to meet the 2030 domestic deployment needs associated with their climate goals, provided that planned projects come online as scheduled . There are several barriers that hinder investment in new clean energy manufacturing capacities outside China, the chief of which is a large production cost gap. IEA analysis of more than 750 manufacturing facilities indicates that the capital and financing costs incurred in building a clean energy manufacturing plant in the United States and Europe are typically 70 130% higher per unit of output capacity than those in China . Energy, material, labour, and fixed operational expenditure can comprise 70 98% of the total costs of building and operating solar PV, wind and battery manufacturing plants, and lower operational costs in China amplify the cost differentials with advanced economies . Financial incentives for manufacturing to help reduce these cost gaps are often provided in the form of capital expenditure support, such as investment tax credits, grants, concessional loans and loan guarantees, or operating cost support, such as production tax credits. However, the challenges of investing in new manufacturing facilities are not limited to cost. The size of the domestic market and its political stability, workforce, infrastructure readiness, permitting processes, regulatory regimes and environmental, social and governance  requirements all affect corporate investment decisions. Policy interventions can help raise the attractiveness of investing by providing a high degree of policy stability, compressing project lead times, strengthening training and certification schemes for workers, enlarging domestic markets, reducing regulatory uncertainties and mandating higher ESG standards. Measures to support innovation, including R&D grants and support for rapid prototyping, can also make a difference. Critical mineral markets were turbulent in 2023, with a sharp drop in the price of many materials. These lower prices have helped to bring about lower clean technology costs, including a 14% reduction in battery pack costs in 2023 but they are now dampening the investment appetite for new resource developments, with implications for future supply diversification . In the case of nickel, for example, three quarters of operating or potential projects that are at risk in today’s price environment are outside the top three producing countries. If they close because of low prices, supply will become further concentrated among the largest suppliers. A number of projects to develop new critical mineral mines and refineries have been announced in recent years, but growth in the availability of critical minerals from the pipeline of announced projects – many of which have significant lead times – is set to be slower than expected growth in manufacturing capacity for a number of critical minerals. For example, in the APS in 2035, for copper and lithium, there is a sizeable gap between demand and expected supply based on announced projects . Balances for nickel and cobalt also look tight in terms of confirmed projects, but the outlook is better if projects at earlier stages of development are included . These results should not be interpreted to mean that energy transition goals are unattainable due to material constraints. The gaps between future demand and anticipated supply could be closed by developing additional mining and refining projects, more diversified technology choices such as for battery chemistries or grid networks, promoting innovation, such as more efficient battery pack design, and boosting recycling . They do however highlight risks to energy security based on current critical minerals investment and technology trends. Further risks arise from the high degree of concentration of supplies of many critical minerals within a few countries. Based on the pipeline of announced projects, this looks unlikely to change over the next decade. From 2023 to 2035, some 50 75% of supply growth for refined copper, lithium, and cobalt is projected to come from today’s largest producers, and the same is true for about 90% of battery grade graphite supply and nickel growth. The figures for rare earth elements are lower, but these too face very high levels of market concentration . There are challenges in financing new critical mineral supply chains, including cost inflation, long term price uncertainty and the limited value that consumers currently place on diversification. However, there is plenty of scope for demand side actions such as recycling, innovation and behavioural change, for example right sizing EV batteries, to play a role to ease potential supply strains. In the NZE Scenario, for example, demand for copper increases by 50% to 2040 but primary supply rises only by 30% because of increased recycling. Incentivising products which score highly on ESG criteria can also help diversify supply sources, but standards and regulatory interventions are likely to be needed to encourage the widespread use of sustainably and responsibly produced materials. Subsidies or tax credits are another option for supporting the production of responsibly sourced materials, for example by linking eligibility to the procurement of a certain percentage of material supply from responsibly and sustainably produced materials. Carbon accounting frameworks and carbon pricing schemes could also help drive pricing differentiation between various sources of materials, and disclosure policies such as those included in the European Union Battery Regulation could make it easier for purchasers and consumers to determine the emissions of different material sources. The 2022 global energy crisis provided a stark reminder of how much societies depend on reliable and affordable supplies of energy. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine led to a huge increase in wholesale energy prices, prompting governments worldwide to spend USD 940 billion to support their populations by keeping energy more affordable. These interventions helped limit the cost pass through to retail energy prices but were insufficient to safeguard households entirely, particularly those with low incomes. Worldwide, consumers spent on average 20% more on energy in 2022 than in 2021, with the rising cost of energy outpacing increases in disposable income over the same period. The situation began to improve in 2023, with declining wholesale energy prices, but the rollback of consumer affordability support measures meant end user energy prices remained relatively high in some regions. In advanced economies, the poorest 10% of households can spend up to a quarter of their disposable income on residential energy and transport fuels, even though they consume about half as much of these fuels as the richest 10%. This level of expenditure means that some households face difficult choices between heating or cooling their homes and meeting other basic necessities. In 2022, almost one in ten people in the European Union – more than 40 million people – were unable to keep their homes adequately warm . In emerging market and developing economies, modern energy use by households is on average only one third of that in advanced economies: the richest 10% of households in emerging market and developing economies today consume about as much energy as the poorest 10% in advanced economies. The disparities between income groups in emerging market and developing economies is also wider than in advanced economies . In these economies, the poorest consume around one quarter of the energy consumed by the richest. They are also heavily dependent on the traditional use of biomass, which meets one third of residential energy demand and is not included in expenditure metrics. Total household spendings on energy, including residential energy and transport fuels, currently averages nearly USD 4 000 per year in advanced economies and around USD 700 per year in emerging market and developing economies. In the NZE Scenario, households in advanced economies soon start to see lower energy bills than in the STEPS thanks to investment in improved insulation, more efficient heating and cooling systems, behaviour changes and wholesale fossil fuel prices that have been driven lower by reduced demand. Public support for household investment in clean energy equipment also reduces direct household energy expenditure in the NZE Scenario. These savings also far outweigh the increased cost borne by consumers in adopting higher efficiency and fuel switching measures. In emerging market and developing economies, household energy expenditure is initially higher in the NZE Scenario than in the STEPS as a result of increased access to modern energy, reductions in fossil fuel subsidies and the introduction of CO2 pricing. Household energy expenditure in the NZE Scenario nevertheless is around 25% lower than in the STEPS by 2050 . Many clean energy technologies are already the most affordable options when life cycle costs are considered. While their upfront costs in many cases are higher than those of their conventional equivalents, they often have much lower operating costs because they are more efficient. They also shield consumers from volatility in fossil fuel prices. However, the higher upfront costs of many clean technologies compared with their conventional counterparts is a significant barrier for lowand middle income households. Addressing this issue is crucial because the energy transition cannot succeed if the poorest segments of the population are left behind. Potential measures include targeted subsidies for efficiency upgrades and fuel switching, tax rebates and lowor zero interest loans. Ensuring that these households have access to affordable financing is especially important in emerging market and developing economies where higher interest rates exacerbate the financial burden of technologies with high capital costs. An inequality that is sometimes given insufficient weight in today’s energy system is the disparity between urban and rural households. Rural houses are often more isolated and more expensive to connect to energy networks, and so they often face higher energy prices, despite efforts by many governments to regulate electricity and natural gas prices so that they are broadly the same for households in rural and urban areas. In advanced economies, rural households spend around one third more on energy than their urban counterparts, and this expenditure represents a larger portion of their total expenditure. Several factors contribute: rural households tend to be larger and less efficient than those in urban areas, which drives up heating and cooling bills they spend more on transport fuels because they have to travel further to get to work and to access essential services  and have less access to public transport and so tend to own and use personal vehicles more frequently. In emerging market and developing economies outside China, average energy bills for rural households are almost half the average level of urban households, yet they account for a very similar share of their total expenditure. Rural households tend to have more limited access to modern energy services and so rely more on the traditional use of biomass. They also tend to have lower incomes, lower levels of ownership of energy consuming equipment, and less access to developed transport infrastructure. In China, rural and urban households on average spend similar amounts on energy, though rural households devote a somewhat larger share of their budget on it. As in advanced economies, rural households in China primarily use modern energy sources and tend to be larger and less efficient than urban ones. However, lower levels of ownership of energyconsuming equipment limit their total energy expenditure. Because rural households in advanced economies tend to spend more on energy than urban ones, they could potentially benefit more than urban households from the lower operating costs of clean energy technologies. For example, the average payback period for an electric car for rural households in advanced economies is under five years, compared with above six years for urban households, and the average payback period for heat pumps is 13 years for rural households, compared with ten years for urban ones . The availability of public charging stations in rural areas remains a major hurdle, especially in regions where long distance driving is common. The clean energy technology proposition is less clear cut in emerging market and developing economies, where access gaps and lower disposable income lead to much lower levels of energy consumption in rural households. Increasing clean energy investment has led to a steady increase in the number of people working in the energy sector. In 2023, more than 67 million people were employed in the energy industry worldwide, 4% more than in 2022, with most of the growth coming from clean energy industries . In a number of major economies, clean energy has been a prominent driver for new economy wide employment, for example contributing as much as 10% of overall job growth in China in 2023. A few key technologies are responsible for most of the new jobs. EV manufacturing and their batteries saw some of the biggest gains in employment: 0,4 million jobs were added in 2023, raising the global total to 2,7 million. Nearly three quarters of the global EV and EV battery workforce in 2023 was located in China, with employers benefitting from new energy vehicle manufacturing incentives from the government. About one fifth of the global EV and battery workforce was in the United States and the European Union, which both have large existing vehicle manufacturing capacities and have recently implemented policies that aim to boost domestic EV manufacturing. Solar PV and wind energy also saw substantial employment growth in 2023: they now account for a combined 6,2 million workers worldwide, most of which work in construction and installation. The share of clean energy in economy wide employment growth in most emerging market and developing economies outside China has been more muted than in advanced economies. This is partly because the non energy economy of these countries has been growing rapidly, but also because they have seen much lower levels of clean energy investment than advanced economies and China. The largest share of clean energy jobs today is in the construction and installation of new energy projects, followed by jobs in operation. But in emerging market and developing economies, these roles tend to pay less than comparable jobs in advanced economies, even when adjusted for purchasing power parity. Lower labour costs in emerging market and developing economies should be an advantage to attract new clean energy industries. However, most new clean technology manufacturing facilities to date have been concentrated in China, advanced economies and Southeast Asia. Growth in clean energy manufacturing employment has been particularly slow in Africa and Central and South America. This may reflect concerns on the part of prospective investors about relatively small domestic and regional markets for deployment, ample global manufacturing capacity for many clean technologies, and a relative absence of relevant adjacent industries and skills that are often a strong draw for clean energy manufacturers siting new facilities. In the STEPS, more than 6 million new energy workers are needed worldwide by 2030. This figure rises to 15 million in the NZE Scenario. EVs and EV batteries see the largest gains to 2030, with the number of jobs in the STEPS increasing from 2,7 million today to 6,7 million in 2030. In the NZE Scenario, this rises to 10,5 million . Job losses are associated with declining production and consumption of fossil fuels in each scenario. The global coal mining workforce has been shrinking for more than a decade, led by the push to modernise the mining industry in China, and this is set to continue in the years ahead. By 2030, the number of coal supply jobs worldwide falls by over 20% in the STEPS and by 50% in the NZE Scenario. The number of oil and natural gas supply jobs rises by almost 300 000 in the STEPS but falls by nearly 5 million jobs in the NZE Scenario to 2030. Many oil and gas companies, especially in advanced economies, are turning to contract work to manage short term increases in worker demand while adopting strategies of portfolio diversification and upskilling to hedge against uncertainty in future demand. The impact of these losses on individuals and communities can be huge. In some cases, workers may be able to find alternative work in other energy sectors. But even those workers that are best placed to make this switch, such as highly skilled oil and gas workers, face challenges: new jobs may not be located in or near the places where they currently work or offer the same benefits and remuneration as their previous occupation. In many other cases, the skills of energy workers may not neatly align with other energy jobs that are created. Coal workers may face particular challenges on this front. Co ordination between government, labour unions and industry is critical to ensure that all workers that lose their jobs are able to access financial support and skills training and to promote the provision of alternative opportunities. Several parts of the energy industry are facing skill shortages today. This poses a risk to clean energy transitions. Many clean energy sectors compete for the same limited pool of trade workers, including construction workers, welders and electricians, and those with the necessary skills are in many cases already in short supply in the general buildings sector. Some skilled workers may move into clean energy from sectors such as oil and gas, nuclear and hydropower, but these sectors are also facing skills losses as older workers retire. Notable shortages have also emerged in recent years in manufacturing and transport. Employers are using a range of strategies to cope with the lack of skilled labour. Option include raising wages, adopting automation, increasing on the job training, and in some cases, accepting insufficiently skilled candidates for critical roles. The new clean energy economy offers substantial opportunities to stimulate local economies and improve the quality of life for workers. But capturing these benefits and preventing the skills gap from widening further requires both the public and private sectors to invest in education and training. Collaboration has an important part to play in getting the most from such investment. For example, closer partnerships between educational institutions and industry would help improve up to date curricula for future energy workers. Policies such as the European Skills Agenda and the US Inflation Reduction Act are looking to address these issues, but current efforts in these regions and elsewhere most likely need to be supplemented to prevent a shortage of skilled workers from becoming a bottleneck for the energy transition. The Covid 19 pandemic and global energy crisis setback efforts to expand electricity access. For the first time in decades, the number of people worldwide without access to electricity increased in 2022. The effects were felt most acutely in sub Saharan Africa, where the number of people without electricity access increased by around 15 million between 2019 and 2022. In 2023, the number of people worldwide without electricity access started to fall again, decreasing by around 13 million despite ongoing macroeconomic challenges. Accelerated grid connections were the main driver of renewed progress in Nigeria, Rwanda, Uganda, Senegal and Ethiopia. This was enabled by strong government support and affordability programmes such as the Hybrid Connection Programme in Uganda. There were also improvements in developing Asia, with Cambodia, Myanmar, Pakistan and the Philippines witnessing a large reduction in the number of people without access to electricity. Bangladesh achieved universal access in 2023. Solar home systems saw record sales for the second year in a row in 2023, with strong uptake in West Africa, even though there was an increasing share of grid connected households in developing Asia . Despite this progress, however, almost 750 million people still have no access to electricity around the world, 80% of which are in sub Saharan Africa. Progress to achieve universal access to clean cooking also slowed in the 2019 2022 period in many countries. Increased strains on household incomes and rising energy prices hindered progress. Plus, millions of households that had previously gained access reverted, at least temporarily, to traditional cooking fuels. Recent gains have come from well established, funded and targeted clean cooking policies, which were generally resilient even through the Covid 19 pandemic. Several notable programmes in China and India over the past ten years provided access to clean cookstoves to tens of millions of households. However, progress in sub Saharan Africa has been slow, and the number of people without access to clean cooking continues to rise, with damaging effects on health and livelihoods, particularly for women and children. Our latest estimates suggest that more than 2 billion people globally did not have access to clean cooking in 2023. New policies are set to facilitate access to clean cooking solutions. Around 630 million people without access today live in countries where new and improved government initiatives and regulatory frameworks have been introduced in the past couple of years . This includes new national clean cooking plans in Kenya, Nigeria, Tanzania, São Tomé and Príncipe, and Uganda. Tanzania has plans to reduce import duties for clean cooking stoves and fuels and increase investment in liquefied petroleum gas  storage. Madagascar started working on its Integrated Energy Access Plan. There is renewed policy momentum in India with the launch of the National Efficient Cooking Programme. In Pakistan, a national clean cooking strategy is being developed in line with the 2023 National Clean Air Policy. The governments of Kenya, Rwanda and Sierra Leone have established clean cooking delivery units. Several other sub Saharan countries are considering similar initiatives. At the Summit on Clean Cooking in Africa, co hosted by the IEA in May 2024, more than USD 2,2 billion of new funding was committed for clean cooking initiatives in Africa, plus several other positive developments in policy, financing and partnerships. Around 90% of both the population without access to electricity and clean cooking today live in countries that have official targets to improve access, though only around half live in countries with targets aligned to the United Nations Sustainable Development Goal  7,1, with its objective to ensure universal access to affordable, reliable and modern energy services by 2030. In the STEPS, around 645 million people still lack access to electricity in 2030, and 1,7 billion lack access to clean cooking . This is a slight improvement over the STEPS in the WEO 2023, but it still falls well short of the SDG 7,1 goal. In the APS, where all official targets are met on time and in full, around 280 million people still lack electricity access in 2030, and the equivalent figure for clean cooking is around 745 million. In the NZE Scenario, universal access to electricity and clean cooking is achieved in full by 2030. In total, reaching universal access worldwide requires around USD 55 billion of capital investment each year through to 2030, of which around USD 10 billion annually is for clean cooking. Public and concessional finance has a crucial role to improve affordability and reduce perceived risks for private investors through programmes and initiatives such as the World Bank and African Development Bank commitment to provide 300 million people in Africa with access to electricity by 2030 . Behavioural changes by consumers to reduce energy use are an under employed lever for reaching energy security and climate goals. Behavioural change can help limit growth in energy demand and thus curb emissions, especially in sectors where technical alternatives are scarce or costly. Around 25 countries include behavioural measures in their Nationally Determined Contributions  or long term strategies. Most behavioural measures relate to transport. For example, many European countries aim to reduce the use of private cars through measures such as road space allocation schemes, low emissions zones and investment in public transport infrastructure and cycle lanes. Bangladesh and Türkiye include targets for modal shifts from road transport to rail, while Colombia and Austria have set targets for bicycle use. Measures in NDCs and other climate strategies are incorporated into the APS, and they account for less than 1% of the difference in emissions between the APS and the STEPS in 2035. This relatively small share reflects a perception by policy makers that measures to encourage behavioural change are unpopular. However, there is mounting evidence that it is possible to win public support for effective policies. For example, support for congestion charging in Stockholm, London and elsewhere increased significantly in the years following its introduction as parallel improvements were made in public transport and as citizens increasingly realised the benefits of reduced congestion and air pollution. Discretionary changes, such as reducing thermostat settings, were made by many people during the global energy crisis in 2022, in part in response to public awareness campaigns. In addition, many people that worked from home during the Covid 19 pandemic continue to do so, thereby reducing commutes. The NZE Scenario taps the full potential for behavioural change to reduce emissions . In total, around 5% of the difference in emissions reductions between the STEPS and the NZE Scenario in 2035 stem from behavioural change. On a per capita basis, CO2 reductions from behaviour change are more than four times larger in advanced economies than in emerging market and developing economies. Measures to reduce car use in cities and promote shared mobility are adopted widely, which reduces CO2 emissions by around 300 Mt globally in 2035. Moderating space heating and cooling in buildings where this is feasible saves about 150 Mt and introducing a levy on frequent flying cuts emissions by a further 80 Mt in 2035. Two thirds of the emissions reductions in the NZE Scenario from behavioural change are facilitated or mandated by governments, such as congestion charging or reduced speed limits on roads. Around 40% of the behavioural measures adopted require investment in dedicated infrastructure, such as cycle lanes or high speed rail networks . The remaining one third of emissions reductions are mainly from discretionary changes, half of which revolve around energy saving measures in homes that can be encouraged by information and awareness campaigns in conjunction with home energy consumption reports. Energy related CO2 emissions increased by just over 1% in 2023 to a record high of 37,7 gigatonnes . In the STEPS, CO2 emissions reach just over 38 Gt in the mid‐2020s and then fall to less than 29 Gt in 2050. Around 60% of the decline in emissions to 2050 occurs in advanced economies, mainly due to declining emissions from electricity generation and transport. Emissions in emerging market and developing economies fall more slowly, with reductions in emissions from electricity generation partially offset by increases in road transport and industry . In the APS, global CO2 emissions fall to around 32 Gt in 2030 and 12 Gt in 2050. Advanced economies collectively reduce their emissions to close to zero in 2050. The pace of emissions reductions in emerging market and developing economies accelerates in the early 2030s, but they still emit around 10 Gt CO2 in 2050. In the NZE Scenario, global CO2 emissions decline to around 25 Gt in 2030, a 33% reduction from 2023 levels, and to net zero in 2050. Net zero electricity sector emissions are achieved in aggregate around 2035 in advanced economies and in 2045 in emerging market and developing economies. Advanced economies achieve net zero emissions in aggregate by the mid 2040s, and they collectively remove around 0,9 Gt CO2 from the atmosphere via carbon removal technologies in 2050. China reaches net zero emissions around 2050 and other emerging market and developing economies only well after 2050. Various pathways for future CO2 emissions lead to very different temperature outcomes . In the STEPS, the global average long term temperature rise, which currently stands at around 1,3 °C above pre industrial levels, exceeds 1,9 °C around 2050 and reaches 2,4 °C in 2100. The lower levels of future emissions in the APS lead to a global average surface temperature rise of around 1,7 °C in 2100. The NZE Scenario sees a peak temperature rise of less than 1,6 °C around 2040 before falling back to below 1,5 °C by 2100. Because of uncertainties about the physical response of the climate to future emissions and warming, higher  temperature outcomes cannot be ruled out. For example, in the STEPS there is about a one third chance of a temperature rise above 2,6 °C in 2100, and in the NZE Scenario there is about one third chance of the temperature rise remaining above 1,6 °C in 2100. These levels of warming refer to the long term average temperature rise. Short term climate variability arising from natural cycles – such as the El Niño Southern Oscillation – can raise or lower global temperatures by up to 0,2 °C and so the temperature rise in any given month or year can be higher or lower than the long term average trend. Several estimates of the global average temperature rise during the 12 month period from July 2023 to June 2024 exceed 1,5 °C. However, the temperature goals of the Paris Agreement are generally interpreted as long term warming levels. Even if the global temperature exceeds 1,5 °C for a short period, the temperature can fall back from that level in the long term. Every tenth of a degree matters, and countries around the world need to bring emissions down to net zero as soon as possible to avoid the worst impacts of climate change . Methane is responsible for around 30% of the long term rise in global temperature, and rapid and sustained reductions in methane emissions are essential to reduce near term global warming. The fossil fuel sector is responsible for nearly 120 million tonnes  of methane emissions each year, or around one third of total methane emissions from human activities, and there is scope for immediate and low cost reductions. The IEA estimates that around two thirds of methane emissions from fossil fuels could be avoided through the deployment of known and readily available technologies, often at low – or even negative – cost, and an emissions price of USD 20/tonne CO2 equivalent would be enough to make it cost effective to deploy nearly all measures to abate fossil fuel methane emissions. There is mounting momentum for action on methane. Some 157 countries, which together are responsible for around half of global human caused methane emissions, have signed the Global Methane Pledge, committing them to a collective effort to reduce global methane emissions by at least 30% from 2020 levels by 2030. A group of 54 oil and gas companies have joined the Oil and Gas Decarbonisation Charter, an industry initiative committed to reducing upstream methane emissions to near zero by 2030. We estimate that achieving all methane pledges made by countries and companies would cut emissions from fossil fuels by 50% by 2030. However, many pledges are not backed by detailed implementation plans, and several major emitters have not committed to act on methane, including Russia and India. Methane emissions from fossil fuel operations fall in each scenario from 2023 to 2030. In the STEPS, they decline by around 25%, in the APS by 50%, and in the NZE Scenario by 75%. In the STEPS, reductions take place where cost effective abatement options exist or where policy requirements are in place, for example, in the United States and the European Union. In the APS, pledges to tackle methane, including through the Global Methane Pledge, other climate commitments, and company efforts to deliver near zero methane emissions targets are assumed to be achieved in full. As a result, methane emissions from oil and gas drop 55% by 2030 and emissions from coal drop almost 40% by then. In the NZE Scenario, all fossil fuel producers reduce their methane emission intensities by 2030 to the levels being achieved today by the world’s best operators: the methane emissions intensity of oil and gas operations falls from 1,3% today to less than 0,1% in 2050 and the intensity of coal operations falls from 1,2% today to 0,6% . New technology and tools for tracking emissions, including satellites and other remote sensing technologies, can speed up action. Their widespread use would help increase transparency on emissions and facilitate regulatory oversight. It would also provide useful information for other interested stakeholders, including buyers and investors looking at climate credentials. Lowand middle income countries may require technical assistance or support to identify abatement opportunities, obtain financing and develop regulations. There is increasing interest in some countries in tackling methane emissions from fossil fuel imports . In advanced economies, methane emissions arising from the production of oil and gas that they import amount to around 15 Mt annually, which is similar to the level of emissions that occur within their borders from domestic production and local distribution. The European Union Methane Regulation, adopted in May 2024, requires natural gas, oil and coal imported into the European Union under contracts concluded after January 2027 to meet reporting requirements equivalent to those for domestic sources. It also references a methane intensity standard for new contracts as from 2030. Harmonised measurement, monitoring, reporting and verification standards can bolster efforts to reduce emissions while also supporting energy security by increasing the amount of natural gas captured during production and subsequently made available for sale. There are many examples of current initiatives, including: the United Nations Environment Programme Oil and Gas Methane Partnership 2,0  the Coalition for LNG Emission Abatement toward Net Zero  and the Measurement Monitoring Reporting and Verification Framework being led by the US Department of Energy and the European Commission . Exposure to air pollution causes more than 17 000 premature deaths every day, making it deadlier than smoking or obesity. In 2023 nearly 3 million people died prematurely from household air pollution, while ambient  air pollution was responsible for more than 4,5 million deaths. The worst consequences of air pollution are felt in emerging market and developing economies: more than 99% of people exposed to heavily polluted air live in these economies, and more than 90% of premature deaths occur there. The economic costs of air pollution associated with productivity losses and direct healthcare costs exceeds 10% of gross domestic product in some developing economies. Air pollution also harms ecosystems, for example by making forests less resistant to disease, and by polluting lakes and rivers via acid rain. In the STEPS, total emissions of fine particulate matter  air pollution are largely unchanged through to 2050, although there are significant differences by sector . There is a 55% reduction in PM2,5 emissions from the buildings sector to 2050 as a result of increased use of clean cooking fuels and reduced reliance on solid biomass for heating, but this is in part offset by more industry activity and the increased use of bioenergy and waste for industrial heat, especially in emerging market and developing economies. In total, around 2,5 million more people die annually from ambient air pollution in 2050 than today. Annual premature deaths from household air pollution drop by almost 40% to 2050, with large reductions in some parts of the world – in China these deaths are all but eliminated by 2050 – but there are increases elsewhere, including in Africa, as a result of population growth and a failure to achieve universal access to modern energy services. In total, household and ambient air pollution causes around 190 million premature deaths to 2050 in the STEPS, just under 95% of which are in emerging market and developing economies. In the APS, there is a 30% reduction in PM2,5 emissions between 2023 and 2050, mainly from a reduction in the use of biomass and waste for cooking and from a reduction in coal use in electricity generation and oil use in road transport. Nonetheless, population growth and urbanisation mean that there is still a 40% increase in annual premature deaths from ambient air pollution between 2023 and 2050. Annual premature deaths from household air pollution decline by 70% to 2050, mainly as a result of pledges on clean cooking access in sub Saharan Africa. In total, around 160 million people die prematurely from air pollution between 2023 and 2050 in the APS. In the NZE Scenario, the number of people exposed to high concentrations of PM2,5 emissions declines dramatically from current levels. Emissions from electricity generation are almost entirely eliminated by 2050 as fossil fuel use declines, emissions from transport are cut by 85% to 2050 as EVs rapidly gain ground, and emissions from industry are cut by 75% as input fuels become cleaner. This results in around 1,5 million fewer premature deaths from ambient air pollution in 2050 than in 2023. Achieving universal access to clean cooking by 2030 cuts exposure to household air pollution, resulting in around 2,4 million fewer premature deaths in 2050. In total, around 110 million fewer people die prematurely from air pollution between 2023 and 2050 in the NZE Scenario than in the STEPS, and around 80 million fewer than in the APS. Global energy investment is expected to surpass USD 3 trillion for the first time in 2024. About USD 2 trillion is set to be spent on clean energy technologies and infrastructure and USD 1 trillion on fossil fuel supply and power generation. This picture is markedly different from ten years ago: total energy investment was then around USD 2,8 trillion, with about 60% spent on fossil fuels and only 40% on clean energy. Since 2015, investment in fossil fuels has declined by more than 30% while spending on clean energy increased by almost 70%. Around USD 860 billion is set to be invested in oil and gas supply in 2024, which is about 20% more than what is invested in 2035 in the STEPS. Around USD 165 billion is set to be spent on coal in 2024, which is more than twice the level seen in the STEPS in 2035. In the APS, investment in existing and some new oil and gas fields is necessary, but there is no need in aggregate for new exploration. In the NZE Scenario, declines in demand are sufficiently steep that no new long lead time conventional oil and gas projects are required, and no new coal mines or coal mine lifetime extensions are needed either. As a result, fossil fuel investment in the NZE Scenario falls by more than 75% to 2035. Clean energy investment increases in each scenario. In the STEPS, more than 75% of total energy investment of USD 3,5 trillion is directed towards clean energy by 2035 in the APS, clean energy comprises close to 90% of USD 4,5 trillion of energy investment by 2035 in the NZE Scenario, clean energy accounts for more than 95% of investment totalling USD 5,2 trillion . Investment in low emissions power generation and grid infrastructure rises rapidly in the next few years, and the transport sector attracts more enduse investment than any other sector by 2035 in all scenarios, driven by the adoption of EVs and the necessary investment in support infrastructure. Nearly 85% of total clean energy investment in 2024 takes place in advanced economies and China even though they are home to only 35% of the world’s population. The high cost of capital remains a major barrier to investing in clean energy projects and infrastructure in many emerging market and developing economies. Financing costs for a typical utility scale solar PV project are at least twice as high in emerging market and developing economies as in advanced economies and in China. This mainly reflects weak macroeconomic conditions and country specific circumstances in many emerging market and developing countries, but the lack of available local currency domestic lending pools and the high cost of currency derisking tools are also factors. Advanced economies and China increase their clean energy investment by more than 30% to 2035 in the STEPS, by 60 80% in the APS and by 70 100% in the NZE Scenario. Clean energy investment in other emerging market and developing economies doubles in the STEPS, triples in the APS and rises by a factor of six in the NZE Scenario over this period . In the NZE Scenario, 40% of clean energy investment globally occurs in these regions in 2035, up from 15% today. Global investment in the power sector is expected to reach more than USD 1,3 trillion in 2024, most of which is for low emissions power assets such as renewables, nuclear power, grids and battery storage. Despite concerns over high interest rates and the profitability of renewables firms, this represents an increase of 8% over total low emissions power investment in 2023. By 2035, investment in low emissions power accounts for almost all power sector investment in the STEPS and the APS, and it rises in these scenarios to USD 1,7 trillion and USD 2,2 trillion respectively. The level of investment is higher still in the NZE Scenario. Achieving the goal of tripling installed renewables capacity by 2030, as in this scenario, requires doubling current investment levels in renewable power, grids and battery storage to USD 2,5 trillion by 2030. This rises further to USD 2,7 trillion by 2035 as the world rapidly electrifies large parts of the global economy to meet climate and energy access goals and as demand rises rapidly in emerging market and developing economies. Across all scenarios, power sector investment peaks around 2035 and declines afterwards as costs for renewable power and battery storage continue to decrease and as the number of new renewable capacity installations falls slightly from the mid 2030s once power systems are fully decarbonised . The reduction is particularly pronounced in the NZE Scenario because renewable power costs decline faster than in the other scenarios in response to the strength of the initial ramp up in capacity installations in this scenario. To enable this rollout of renewable power, spending on grids and battery storage doubles from around USD 0,6 per dollar invested in 2023 to USD 1,2 per dollar invested in 2050 in all scenarios. The European Union Green Deal helped drive a 70% increase in spending on clean power in Europe between 2019 and 2024 and the United States Inflation Reduction Act led to a 60% rise in the United States over the same period. China has also seen a major increase in clean power investment, doubling its spending on renewable power, nuclear power, grids and batteries over the past five years. In the NZE Scenario, clean power investment increases from USD 560 billion in 2024 to more than a trillion in 2035 in advanced economies, and from USD 450 billion to USD 650 billion in China. Today around 20% of clean power investment globally is in emerging market and developing economies other than China. In the NZE Scenario, there is a more than a fourfold increase in clean power investment in these countries, and their share of the global total rises to 40% by 2035. Lowering their cost of capital is vital to stimulate investment. This requires a combination of clear and stable regulations, political commitments, derisking instruments and concessional finance in order to attract more private capital. Concessional finance provided by development finance institutions  can play a catalytic role to mobilise private investment, especially in low income countries: it will not be sufficient on its own to increase investment to the levels in the NZE Scenario, nonetheless its role in enabling investment in emerging market and developing economies is indispensable. Solar PV investment is set to increase to USD 450 billion in 2024, not far off the levels of investment in 2035 in the NZE Scenario. Increases in solar PV module and battery manufacturing capacity have helped to push their prices down to record lows, but the high degree of concentration of production capacity highlights some of the challenges faced by countries and companies looking to gain a foothold in the clean energy economy by supporting domestic manufacturing. Examining the sources of finance for energy projects helps to provide a better understanding of how they can be scaled to meet investment needs. There are significant variations between projects in terms of the capital structure of investment, the investors, the financiers and whether the investment originates from domestic or international sources. Capital structure: Around 45% of current energy investment is financed via debt . Debt financing plays a large part in clean power generation and grid investment projects. Many new generation projects are backed by long term power purchase agreements, and, in the case of grids, by regulated tariffs. These provide for more predictable revenues, making debt financing easier to access. In contrast, a large share of investment in industry today is financed via equity, often through household savings, and many oil and gas developments are financed through retained earnings. The amount of energy investment financed via debt remains around 45% to 2035 in all scenarios. Debt financing increases as clean energy generation and grid investment increases, while equity financing increases with growth in end use sector investment such as residential solar panels, home energy storage systems, EVs and energy efficient appliances. There is an increasing use of off balance sheet project finance structures for renewables developments in all scenarios: these help spread risk and attract more investors because they do not directly impact the balance sheets of the companies involved. Investors in energy include corporations, households and governments. Corporations provide around half of energy financing today because they are investing heavily in renewable energy projects. Commercial financiers are also significantly increasing their capital allocations to the clean energy sector. In the APS and the NZE Scenario in 2035, corporate investment as a share of the total remains broadly constant, but in absolute terms it increases by 50% in 2035 in the APS and by 80% in the NZE Scenario. Households are responsible for around USD 500 billion annual energy sector investment today. Big increases in household end use sector investment doubles this amount to 2035 in the APS and nearly triples it in the NZE Scenario. However, high upfront costs of some home energy efficiency measures are likely to remain beyond the means of low income households, which may lead to a ramp up in government support for those households. Governments are responsible for around USD 1 trillion of energy sector investment today through state owned companies and assets. By 2035, investment by governments increases by around 35% in the APS and by 40% in the NZE Scenario. This is a smaller increase than for other types of investors since government investment and public financing is assumed to be constrained by high levels of indebtedness. Financiers of energy investment include public bodies, commercial organisations and development finance institutions. DFI financing represents a relatively small share of overall financing today, but it plays a crucial role in financing projects that would otherwise be too risky for private investors, particularly in emerging market and developing economies. DFI financing increases 5,5 times in the APS to 2035 and by a factor of eight in the NZE Scenario. Around 80% of energy investment today has a domestic origin component and around 20% comes from international sources. Many emerging market and developing economies are financially constrained, and the sharp increases in needed clean energy investment requires a large increase in support from international investors and institutions. International financing more than doubles from current levels over the next ten years in the APS and it triples in the NZE Scenario. The share of international financing in the overall energy sector investment rises to 25% in the NZE Scenario in 2035. The US economy grew by 2,5% in 2023 and is expected to continue expanding at an average rate of 2,1% per year through to 2035. Inflation, which spiked in 2022, almost halved in 2023 and further declined in the first months of 2024. Recent industrial policies, most importantly the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act of 2021 and the Inflation Reduction Act of 2022 , have spurred a rapid increase in clean energy investment and manufacturing. In addition, the US Environmental Protection Agency issued new rules that raise standards for fossil fuel fired power plants and introduce multi pollutant emissions standards for vehicles, though these may face legal challenges. Energy demand in the United States reached a high point in 2007 and is on a declining trajectory to 2050 in the STEPS. This decline is driven largely by energy efficiency gains, including electrification, with the average annual rate of energy efficiency improvement rising to 2,8% over the period to 2030. Electricity demand growth accelerates, driven by electrification of transport and industry, and the rapid growth of data centres. Renewable sources of electricity, led by solar PV and wind, meet all new demand and displace a considerable amount of coaland gas fired power generation. Total renewables capacity more than triples from 2023 to 2035 in the STEPS, and the share of generation accounted for by renewable energy increases from 22% in 2023 to almost 60% in 2035 and 80% in 2050. Fossil fuels see a significant reduction in demand in the STEPS to 2035 and beyond. Coal demand has been steadily declining over the past 15 years and is set to fall by 80% from 2023 to 2035 in the STEPS, leading to the closure of ageing coal fired power plants. Efforts to limit the impact on affected communities will be essential to ensure just transitions. Natural gas demand is set to peak in the near term and then gradually to decline, reflecting in large part the ramping up of renewables and battery storage in the power sector. Oil demand also peaks in the near term and then decline more rapidly from around 2030, driven largely by the uptake of electric vehicles . Reduced demand enables more natural gas and oil to be available for export. These changes mean that overall CO2 emissions are almost one third lower by 2035, and nearly 60% lower by 2050. Decarbonising electricity by 2035 and achieving net zero energy related emissions by 2050 in the APS requires faster deployment of renewables, nuclear and other low emissions sources. In this scenario, investment in clean technologies rises from USD 280 billion in 2023 to over USD 750 billion in 2035, which is more than 40% above the level in the STEPS. Faster electrification, resulting in part from more rapid adoption of EVs, accelerates electricity demand growth. Renewables deployment accelerates, doubling power sector investment to nearly USD 400 billion in 2035 compared with USD 300 billion in the STEPS, and the deployment of nuclear power, carbon capture technologies and low emissions hydrogen also proceeds more quickly. Total CO2 emissions drop by one third from present levels to 2030 and by 60% to 2035. The United States is one of the largest energy producers in the world. It produced more crude oil in 2023 than any country before has ever done in one year, having increased its output by nearly 80% over the past decade. It was also the largest natural gas producer in the world in 2023, producing two thirds more than Russia and four times as much as Iran. Its liquefied natural gas  exports are set to play an expanding role in international natural gas markets in the coming years. It is a large coal producer, though production is set to decline in step with demand. The United States is increasingly engaged in manufacturing clean energy technologies, including solar cells, wind turbines, electrolysers and heat pumps. Announced plans for domestic battery production would be enough to meet all projected domestic needs by 2030. Electricity demand in the United States increased by just 4,4% from 2011 to 2023, but it rises by 25% from 2023 to 2035 in the STEPS, up by nearly 1 000 TWh . The uptake of EVs accounts for nearly 60% of electricity demand growth to 2035. Industry is the next largest driver of demand growth, with the use of electricity expanding in many sub sectors. Despite efficiency gains, use of electricity in buildings also rises, some of which reflects rapidly expanding demand for data centres. While there is some uncertainty about the rate of growth for data centres linked to artificial intelligence , we currently project that the potential impact on overall US electricity demand growth by 2035 is modest relative to other sectors, with a set of low emissions options available to meet this demand. Electric car sales in the United States increase from 1,4 million in 2023 to close to 11 million in 2035 in the STEPS, raising their share of total new passenger car sales from 10% today to around 70%. In 2023, price cuts for key EV models halved the average price difference between EVs and conventional cars, and the increase in demand to 2035 is supported by further projected declines in EV costs. Policy support is also poised to boost uptake, notably through the following: USD 5 billion in federal funding for EV chargers along highways USD 2,5 billion for charging and other alternative fuelling infrastructure, including hydrogen, in urban and rural areas and alternative fuel corridors and USD 5 billion for zero emissions buses. There is uncertainty about the pace of EV uptake if EV sales in 2030 are around 2 million lower than in the STEPS, this would raise US oil consumption by around 600 kb/d and CO2 emissions by over 70 Mt CO2 . Renewables are set to far outpace electricity demand growth. In the STEPS, they expand by nearly 2 200 TWh to 2035, more than triple the level in 2023. This raises their share of electricity generation from 22% to 58%, reflecting the availability of high quality renewable resources, the existence of established markets with low technology costs and strong policy support at both federal and state levels. Solar PV sees the biggest expansion by 2035 – solar output increases by more than electricity demand growth on its own – and wind output also doubles. As a result, the share of wind and solar PV in electricity generation rises from 15% in 2023 to 50% in 2035. Other renewables and nuclear power also increase slightly over the period. In the APS, renewables increase more than fourfold from 2023 to 2035 to fulfil the ambitious target of fully or predominantly decarbonised electricity by 2035, raising the share of renewables to nearly 75%. Electricity generation from fossil fuels declines in the STEPS by about 40% from the current level to below 1 500 TWh by 2035. Coal fired generation continues to decline: in 2023, it was two thirds below the peak level seen in 2005, and by 2035 it is 95% below that level. Natural gas fired generation is projected to peak in the near term, after more than three decades of growth: it falls by 30% from 2023 to 2035, though capacity declines by just 10% because many gas fired plants remain in place to support electricity system reliability. To 2035, the blending of low emissions hydrogen in gas fired power plants also makes inroads in the APS. To ensure electricity security throughout clean energy transitions, short term flexibility in power systems increases four times faster than electricity demand in the STEPS from 2023 to 2035, though seasonal flexibility needs grow in step with demand growth. Natural gas and hydro dispatchable power plants remain primary providers of flexibility: coal contributes too but diminishes rapidly. New sources of flexibility emerge, led by battery storage and demandresponse measures. Battery storage complements solar PV very effectively, and its costs are falling: behind the meter and utility scale applications together are projected to increase by over 300 GW to 2035 in the STEPS, a 16 fold increase over today’s level, and by 2035 battery storage is second only to natural gas as a source of dispatchable capacity. The Latin America and the Caribbean region  has substantial clean energy potential and making the most of this could help to bolster its economy and its energy security. The LAC energy sector already has one of the lowest CO2 emissions intensities worldwide, underpinned by significant hydroelectric power, a relatively small share of energy intensive industries, and the use of biofuels for transport. Prolonged drought and record temperatures in 2024 are straining electricity supply across the region as hydroelectric generation falters, leading to blackouts and forced power cuts in several countries. Boosting solar PV and wind generation could help avoid future disruptions, reducing the region's vulnerability to extreme weather conditions and the need for fossil fuel imports. Investment in clean energy is increasing, yet it needs to ramp up further to meet the energy and climate goals set by LAC countries. In a record year for renewables in 2023, 27 GW of solar PV and wind capacity were added, led by installations in Brazil . In the STEPS, current LAC renewable trends imply that installed capacity of wind and solar PV increases nearly three times by 2035 relative to 2023 levels. In the APS, net zero emissions pledges help expand installed renewables capacity more than four times. Fossil fuels continue to play an important role in LAC energy systems. Oil accounts for 60% of current fossil fuel demand in the region, natural gas for 34% and coal for 6%. In the STEPS, fossil fuel use grows 5% by 2035, mainly due to increased demand from transport and industry. Several LAC countries are significant fossil fuel producers: Brazil was the thirdlargest contributor to the increase in global oil supply in 2023. Guyana was also in the topten. Argentina plans to become a net natural gas exporter in the near term. LAC is well positioned to electrify both the transport and industry sectors, thanks to the region’s low emissions power systems and significant potential to expand renewables. In the APS, the deployment of biofuels accelerates, as does electrification: 18% of vehicles on LAC roads are electric by 2035, around ten percentage points more than in the STEPS. There is support for this: several large EV manufacturers plan to produce in LAC, and the 2024 MOVER programme in Brazil looks to provide over USD 3 billion in subsidies to EV manufacturers . In industry, increasing use of electricity, mostly for lowand medium temperature processes, lifts the share of electricity in energy demand by five percentage points in the APS compared with the STEPS, raising it to 31% by 2035. Together with energy efficiency improvements, especially for air conditioning and appliances in buildings, renewables and electrification play a central role in helping fossil fuel demand peak around 2025 in the APS. LAC is in a good position to meet its energy needs and reap economic benefits as clean energy transitions advance. Today the region produces about a quarter of global liquid biofuels leveraging bioenergy could also support low emissions hydrogen production. The LAC region is endowed with rich mineral resources with over one third of global silver, copper and lithium reserves. Global mineral demand for clean energy technologies is set to double by 2030 in the STEPS and APS. Expanding clean energy value chains would strengthen employment opportunities and could contribute to sustainable growth, for example by processing the minerals in the region and using low emissions hydrogen to produce fertilisers or iron. Bioenergy and low emissions hydrogen are important for energy transitions because they can substitute fossil fuels in some hard to abate sectors. Biofuels are a key priority for Brazil, which holds the 2024 G20 Presidency and will host the Conference of the Parties  30 in 2025. LAC is already a leader in biofuels production. Brazil’s pioneering experience developing supply and demand for ethanol dates to the 1970s. Brazil is the largest producer and consumer of liquid biofuels in the region and the second largest producer worldwide. Argentina and Colombia are emerging as prominent suppliers. Biofuels production in LAC today is dominated by conventional ethanol and biodiesel for use in road transport . Biofuels are poised to become a key resource for decarbonising hard to abate sectors around the world, offering an opportunity to build on the region’s biofuels production experience. In aviation, for instance, global demand for biojet kerosene is increasing, and LAC could emerge as a major supplier of biojet kerosene in the next decade, providing 15% of global production in the STEPS in 2035. Beyond the production of liquid biofuels, solid bioenergy and biogases are also set to play a critical role in decarbonisation in the region, with heavy industries, notably steel and chemicals, increasing their bioenergy demand by 34% in the STEPS and 67% in the APS by 2035. Bioenergy demand in LAC, for both liquid biofuels and solid bioenergy, rises by 20% in the STEPS and 43% in the APS by 2035. Cropland for bioenergy expands to meet this demand but must be balanced with the pressing need to tackle deforestation and avoid greenhouse gas  emissions from land use change. Careful planning could help meet demand for land for bioenergy, without increasing deforestation, through a focus on restoring degraded land, reducing land allocated to livestock, and prioritising short rotation woody crops. With an energy intensity per hectare sixto eight times higher than conventional crops, shortrotation woody crops become the dominant source of biomass being used either directly or as a feedstock for biofuels or biogas . Their share rises from around 15% of supply in 2023 to nearly 40% by 2035 in the STEPS, and about 55% in the APS. The region is also very competitive for low emissions hydrogen production thanks to its exceptional renewable potential, for example, solar PV in the Atacama Desert in Chile, and wind in northeastern Brazil and Patagonia. To capitalise on these potentials, many countries in LAC have published hydrogen strategies, but few projects are moving to the investment stage. Opportunities for hydrogen production vary significantly between our scenarios – 2 Mt of low emissions hydrogen are produced in 2035 in the STEPS, and over three times that amount in the APS. The bulk of hydrogen use today is in oil refineries and ammonia production. Local hydrogen production could support the decarbonisation of those industries and reduce import dependency. In the APS, 33% of ammonia production uses electrolytic hydrogen in 2035, compared to less than 1% in the STEPS. Cheap low emissions hydrogen could also lead to new export opportunities for goods such as near zero emissions iron and synthetic fuels, where synergies between the hydrogen and biofuel industries could be helpful. The European Union  is home to 6% of the world population and accounts for approximately 10% of global energy demand. It continues to be a clean energy leader, with energy related CO2 emissions in 2023 declining more steeply than in 2022, driven by increased electricity production from renewables, a recovery in hydro and nuclear power, reduced emissions in industry, plus a mild winter. Many aspects of the EU Fit for 55 package, which is the implementation framework for the European Union Green Deal, are moving forwards: recent developments include revision of the EU Emissions Trading System and CO2 emissions standards for heavy duty vehicles. In the STEPS, oil demand in the European Union is set to drop by 15% from today’s levels by 2030, natural gas demand by around 10% and coal demand by nearly half. CO2 emissions fall by almost 50% from their 1990 level. The share of electric cars in new registrations expands from just under 25% today to 100% by 2035, and the share of renewables in electricity generation rises from 45% today to around 80%. The outlook for heat pump sales is generally positive, although a slowdown in sales in 2023 looks to have continued into 2024: the growing role of heat pumps in meeting energy demand in buildings contributes to a reduction of nearly 5 billion cubic metres  in gas use in 2030 compared with today. Policy developments in France, Sweden, Poland and Belgium are reinforcing the role of nuclear power in the European Union. In the APS, faster progress is made, including on ambitious components of the Fit for 55 such as retrofit targets for buildings. The result is to reduce fossil fuel demand by 20% in 2030 compared to 2023, to reduce CO2 emissions by 55% relative to 1990 levels, and to meet the REPowerEU goal of eliminating dependence on natural gas from Russia before 2030. The European Union aims to become a hub for clean energy manufacturing the new Net Zero Industry Act sets a goal for EU manufacturing capacity to reach at least 40% of its annual clean energy deployment needs by 2030. The European Union was the world’s secondlargest installer of most clean technologies in 2023, second only to China. EU member states added almost 60 GW of solar PV capacity, with over 60% coming from rooftop installations, twice the level seen in 2021. Member states integrated over 15 GW of wind capacity, an increase of 40% compared to 2021. Expanding clean technology adoption in the European Union continues in each scenario, with installed capacity of wind and solar PV projected to more than double from the 2023 level in the STEPS by 2030. Annual electric car sales rise from around 2,5 million units today to over 7 million units in 2030 in the STEPS, accounting for nearly 20% of global EV sales. Announced battery manufacturing capacity is set to swell by fourto six times by 2030 from current levels. Similarly, annual heat pump sales increase from 25 GW today to over 45 GW in 2030, driven by supportive regulations and financial incentives. European consumers were heavily exposed to price spikes during the global energy crisis, but there are signs that the outlook is improving. Electricity prices for households fell on average by over 10% year over year in 2023, and wholesale natural gas prices dropped nearly 70% from the extremely high levels seen in 2022, though they remain higher than in 2021. Tightness in natural gas markets should be eased by the new LNG export terminals that are due to come online from 2025, primarily in Qatar and the United States, adding over 250 bcm of capacity by 2030. Since Russia invaded Ukraine, efforts to diversify gas supply have cut the share of total EU energy imports from Russian pipeline gas from over 40% in 2021 to below 10% today. This is due in part to efforts to improve energy efficiency and boost renewables, but it also reflects a major switch away from Russian pipeline gas to LNG, which now accounts for more than 40% of European Union gas imports. The drive to decarbonise power generation and the impacts of the energy crisis together have brought the cost structures of electricity systems in EUs member states under close scrutiny. Clean energy transitions depend heavily on electrification and expansion of renewables, both of which require significant changes in electricity systems. The diversity of electricity mixes and decarbonisation pathways chosen by the various member states adds to the challenges. Between 2019 and 2023, the average system cost per unit of generated electricity, including the development and maintenance of grids, reached USD 145/MWh in the European Union, which is 60% higher than in the United States, and around 10% higher than in other advanced economies. A key factor behind this difference is the cost of repaying past capital investment in the European Union, which is nearly double that of the United States, and accounted for a third of total system costs on average in the 2019 2023 period. These higher costs stem from the European Union’s early efforts to develop low emissions electricity sources, and in particular from its work in pioneering the large scale deployment of wind and solar PV in the 2010s at a time when they were nascent technologies and relatively expensive compared to today. Also contributing to high electricity costs in many EU member states is the cost of fossil fuel used in electricity generation, including natural gas imports. This accounts for around a quarter of electricity costs across the European Union. While member states have significantly reduced their reliance on coal for electricity generation in recent years, and more recently have significantly cut natural gas pipeline imports from Russia, the extent to which many of them depend on natural gas imports continues to drive up overall electricity costs. EU member states that rely less on natural gas for power generation, such as Denmark, France and Sweden, are less exposed to these high fuel costs. Clean energy transitions provide an opportunity for EU member states to reduce their average electricity system costs. Continuing the shift from coaland gas fired power plants to low emissions electricity sources could reduce total EU electricity system costs by around 12% by 2035. Additional decarbonisation efforts in the APS and achievement of the REPowerEU objectives could reduce system costs a further five percentage points. Investment levels needed for renewable energy sources and grid development are large, but the cost per unit of electricity for the grid component is similar to that in other parts of the world, and investment in renewables is necessary to reduce future electricity costs and GHG emissions. The accelerated transition seen in the APS leads to a more rapid fall in electricity costs. Average electricity system costs are not the same as end user electricity prices, and one of the challenges of energy transitions is ensuring that reductions in electricity system costs are reflected in consumer tariffs. Reforms in electricity market design and use of instruments such as long term contracts, including contracts for difference or power purchase agreements, can help align electricity prices with system costs. The expansion of renewables, the growth of nuclear capacity and the development of flexibility sources should all also weaken the link between the costs of natural gas fired power generation and wholesale electricity market prices. Changes along these lines are likely to lower electricity prices and reduce exposure to fossil fuel price volatility while maintaining an efficient balance between supply and demand. The expansion of renewables will not do much to lower overall electricity costs if they cannot be successfully integrated into electricity systems. Grid congestion and redispatch costs, which hit EUR 4 billion in 2023, are expected to rise, underlining the crucial need to invest in grid infrastructure and to expand interconnections . The investment required is necessary to unlock the benefits of renewables and would be offset by the savings gained from reduced fossil fuel imports. Delays in investing in the necessary grid infrastructure and the provision of flexibility are all too likely to result in increased congestion and price cannibalisation from surplus generation that cannot be integrated. Over time, this could undermine producer revenues and overall security of supply. Further European Union electricity market integration would also help to foster integration of renewables, ensure reliable supply and mitigate price differences between bidding zones. Africa’s economy is expected to expand by an average of 4% per year to 2030, and its population to expand by more than 1 billion people by 2050 both factors will require a major expansion in the continent’s energy system. Renewable energy is growing fast, albeit from a low base: clean energy investment rose by 16% in 2023, but this is concentrated in a handful of countries that have favourable policy environments and lower perceived risks. Just five countries account for nearly 70% of private investment in energy infrastructure in Africa over the last five years . A promising project pipeline in the STEPS is set to boost clean energy investment 42% by 2030, though high financing costs pose a major challenge. Many more projects are required if clean energy investment is to double by 2030, as it does in the APS, and new international efforts to address project bankability are essential in this context. After setbacks from 2020 to 2022, progress on electrification in Africa has resumed. Access rates are projected to reach almost 70% by 2030 in the STEPS, up from 59% today. With electricity consumption in Africa set to rise sharply, financing for new sources of generation and grids will be crucial. Around 80% of new generation capacity through to 2030 is projected to be renewables in both the STEPS and APS, mostly from solar PV, geothermal and hydropower. A positive trajectory has also resumed for access to clean cooking solutions: new policy commitments and new investment – including those announced at the IEA Summit for Clean Cooking in Africa in May 2024 – have improved the outlook. For the first time, the number of people without access to clean cooking is projected to plateau by 2030 in the STEPS. Coal demand in Africa declines by 16% to 2030 in the STEPS. Upgrades to coal plants have extended the lifespan of some facilities, reduced widespread power outages and played a crucial role to support the integration of variable renewables into the grid. At the same time, the rapid expansion of rooftop solar PV is significantly driving down coal use. Natural gas demand in Africa rises by 12%, driven by increasing use in the power sector, desalination projects in North Africa and in industry in sub Saharan Africa. Demand for oil products in Africa rises by 13% to 2030, largely due to a 20% increase in transport demand and the increased use of liquefied petroleum gas for cooking. Subsidy reforms in countries such as Nigeria and Ghana prevent the rise in demand from being even larger. Increasing demand for oil in Africa is the main driver for increased energy related CO2 emissions in the STEPS. In the APS, the level of transport demand growth projected in the STEPS is moderated by import restrictions on inefficient vehicles, measures to displace diesel backup, and an increase in electric two/three wheelers, yet oil demand still rises by 16%. Although new oil prospects and production are coming online, for example in Namibia, continent wide oil production is expected to decline as a result of low investment in existing basins. Conversely, natural gas production is set to climb by 8,5% to 2030, with gas production in North Africa remaining broadly at its current level and production in subSaharan Africa increasing by two thirds. Refining capacity remains limited, relative to projected demand, and the continent is set to continue to be a significant net importer of refined products, despite the startup of the Dangote refinery in Nigeria and other planned projects. Africa is already a key player in the global critical minerals mining sector. In 2022, mining and extractive industries represent over 30% of total exports in 23 African countries, and critical minerals produce around USD 20 billion of revenue each year across the continent. The Democratic Republic of the Congo , South Africa, Zimbabwe and Mozambique are leading producers, but a number of other countries also contribute. Spending on critical mineral exploration in Africa is rebounding after years of decline and is now rising rapidly. The continent already accounts for 70% of global cobalt production and 16% of global copper production. New projects are set to expand Africa’s share of copper, lithium and natural graphite production by 2030: the DRC is on course to become the world's second largest copper supplier by 2030 production of lithium could increase more than fivefold by 2030, depending on production in Zimbabwe and new discoveries in Nigeria and the share of global production of graphite is expected to rise from 10% to 20%, due to projects in Mozambique and Madagascar . Supporting the existing mining project pipeline requires at least USD 1,3 billion in cumulative capital investment by 2040, with a possibility to reach around USD 1,8 billion if projects that are at slightly less advanced stages of development or are seeking financing and/or permits are also considered . Further investment will be needed to expand related infrastructure such as ports. Among other factors, investors are looking for environmental, social and governance improvements in key areas, including action to address child labour. Growth is the common denominator for many energy trends in the Middle East. There are, however, significant variations between the Gulf Council Cooperation  members and other countries in the region, which include Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria. The region is a major producer and consumer of energy, and the spectre of spiralling hostilities cast a large shadow over its supply and demand prospects as well as for global energy markets. Fossil fuels dominate the energy mix in the Middle East, with oil and natural gas responsible for around 98% of the 36 EJ of energy demand in 2023. In the STEPS, energy demand grows by nearly 25% by 2035, while the share of oil and natural gas falls to 92%. In the APS, energy demand growth remains broadly similar to that in the STEPS, even as the share of oil and natural gas falls to 85%. CO2 emissions rise by more than 10% by 2035 in the STEPS and are broadly flat in the APS. In the power sector, the share of oil and natural gas declines from 95% in 2023 to around 80% in 2035 in the STEPS. Renewables generation increases ten fold over this period, mostly solar PV. In the APS, renewable generation increases twenty times to 2035 and the share of oil and natural gas falls below 60%. Natural gas demand in total final consumption  in the Middle East was about 270 bcm in 2023, with the industry sector accounting for the largest share. Gas demand in TFC rises to more than 350 bcm in 2035 in the STEPS and to 315 bcm in the APS. In the STEPS and the APS, natural gas remains the main source of energy for desalination, even with faster increases from solar thermal power in the APS. Investment in fossil fuel supply reaches a high point over the course of this decade in the STEPS, followed by a gradual decline. In the APS, investment in fossil fuels peaks earlier and declines more steeply, reducing by over 35% by 2035. Much of this investment is likely to come from Middle Eastern national oil companies , which accounted for 20% of the global hydrocarbon upstream spending in 2024, up from less than 10% in 2015. A major investment is the North Field West project in Qatar, which will add 20 bcm of new LNG capacity. This project is the latest in a series of investments which, combined, will nearly double Qatar's LNG export capacity to around 200 bcm per year. Saudi Aramco also has plans to scale up investment in gas supply, including domestic gas infrastructure and the Jafurah development, a large liquids rich shale gas play. International investments include stakes in LNG export facilities in North America and Australia, signalling an interest in geographical diversification. The 2023 COP28 climate summit in Dubai highlighted the potential role of the Middle East – especially the GCC – in global clean energy transitions. Amid rising physical climate risks, many countries are now paying close attention to climate and transition priorities as a way to diminish high dependence on fossil fuels for energy and revenue. There is huge scope for the Middle East to accelerate investment in clean energy technologies, based on the region’s significant resource endowments, especially for solar, significant financial resources in many countries, relevant expertise in some high skilled energy companies, and the possibility to use or repurpose some existing infrastructure. From USD 26 billion in 2023, clean energy investment across the region is set to rise to USD 63 billion by 2035 in the STEPS, and to USD 137 billion in the APS. The push for a more diverse energy system is reflected in many national policy objectives, including Nationally Determined Contributions , and investment strategies. ACWA Power develops, builds, owns and operates desalination and power generation projects, including solar and wind, in the Middle East, Africa and Asia. Masdar, an energy company partially owned by ADNOC, has also expanded beyond the Middle East, and has formed a strategic agreement with Iberdrola, a leading wind power producer and one of the largest electric utilities in the world. Some GCC countries have well developed capital markets and sizeable sovereign wealth funds , although the use of these funds for clean energy investment, as with all investment, requires adequate returns. Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates  hold high sovereign credit ratings for their public funds, while those of Oman, Bahrain and Jordan fall into the medium grade category. Outside the GCC, countries such as Iraq do not have SWFs, have very low credit ratings and have limited access to capital. However, the recently established Iraq Development Fund was specifically designed to support non oil economic developments. Syria, Yemen and Lebanon face major security and geopolitical challenges, which makes progress on clean energy transitions extremely difficult. In many countries, actions such as phasing out inefficient fossil fuel subsidies, adjusting SWF mandates, promoting innovative public private partnerships and encouraging foreign investment could unlock more capital. There is significant potential to develop new low emissions generation in the region. Solar PV and wind generation increases from around 30 TWh in 2023 to 430 TWh in 2035 in the STEPS, displacing oil as the second largest source of electricity generation. Several important developments are underway, notably Saudi Arabia’s objective to increase its renewable energy capacity from less than 5 GW to reach between 100 and 130 GW by 2030, though only about 20 GW are planned to date under the National Renewable Energy Programme, including the 2,6 GW Al Shuaibah solar PV project. Elsewhere in the region, the UAE is moving forward with the Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum solar PV park, 5 GW by 2030 in phases, and Iraq is moving ahead with its first utility scale solar PV project, a 1 GW facility. Natural gas demand – and supply – also rise rapidly in the Middle East, although this is tempered in the APS by a much more rapid increase in wind and solar PV generation, which approaches 1 000 TWh in 2035 in the STEPS. Electric vehicles have made little headway so far in the region, but there are some signs of change. Jordan cut import duties and saw a significant uptick in EV sales. The market share for EVs in the UAE was 13% in 2023. Saudi Arabia meanwhile unveiled its first EV assembly plant in 2023 and has plans to significantly expand the network of public chargers. Critical mineral resources related to energy, such as lithium for batteries, are starting to attract more interest, with countries looking to position themselves both as investors in resource rich countries and as midstream players in refining and processing, the latter helped by relatively low energy costs. Saudi Arabia has initiated a USD 207 million geologic mapping project of the Arabian shield, and three lithium refining projects are currently underway in Saudi Arabia and the UAE. Reducing emissions from traditional oil and natural gas upstream and midstream operations is a major part of energy transitions agenda for the region. A number of countries and companies have made commitments to bring these emissions down: most of the major producers in the region participate in the Global Methane Pledge and many of the large NOCs have also joined the Oil and Gas Decarbonisation Charter initiative that was launched at the COP28, including Saudi Aramco and the Abu Dhabi National Oil Company . We estimate that around 15 Mt of methane are released to the atmosphere each year from oil and gas operations in the region, with more than half of this being possible to abate at no net cost, because the cost of the abatement measure is less than the value of the additional gas that is captured and available to market. Taking full advantage of the abatement opportunity would require around USD 2,5 billion in annual investment, a small fraction of the amount generated by the region’s oil and gas industry each year. The Middle East has extensive and well characterised geological pore capacity as well as the technical expertise to deploy carbon capture, utilisation and storage  projects at scale. Activity is picking up with the oil and gas industry in the lead. The UAE recently approved two CCUS projects to capture emissions from gas processing plants with a combined capacity of 3,0 million tonnes carbon dioxide . Qatar is developing a 4,3 Mt CO2 project to capture emissions from its LNG facilities and Saudi Arabia is advancing plans for a 9 Mt CO2 hub. Total CCUS capacity in the region is projected to reach over 30 Mt CO2 in 2035 in the STEPS, but could grow much faster, and it reaches more than 100 Mt CO2 in the APS in 2035 In Eurasia, which comprises the Caspian region and the Russian Federation in our modelling, GDP per capita rose over 3% in 2023 to reach a level 30% higher than the global average. Russia plays an outsized role in the energy architecture of the region, but the continuing war between Russia and Ukraine, following Russia’s full scale invasion in 2022, is shifting priorities and creates huge uncertainty for projections of energy demand and supply. The loss of Europe as its key export market prompted Russia to reach out to its Central Asian neighbours to expand energy partnerships and reinvigorate long standing plans to deliver natural gas to Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan and further afield, though there remains significant uncertainty around the pace and scale of these diversification efforts. The energy sector in Eurasia faces challenging conditions. Ageing building stock and industrial facilities, under maintained pipelines that transport fuel over large distances, and a cold climate mean that the regional energy intensity of GDP is 70% higher than the global average. There are inefficiencies in energy supply, distribution and use. Fossil fuels are heavily subsidised in Eurasia, notably Russia, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan and Azerbaijan. These subsidies total over 6% of the region’s annual GDP. Eurasia is both a major consumer and producer of fossil fuels. In 2023, fossil fuels constituted 90% of Eurasia’s energy demand, the second highest regional average after the Middle East. The region is also a large net exporter of fossil fuels, selling around 200 bcm of natural gas in 2023, along with nearly 10 mb/d of oil and 175 Mtce of coal. Russia accounts for around 75% of the region’s oil and gas exports, although these have been significantly affected by sanctions imposed after its invasion of Ukraine: in 2023, Russia’s natural gas exports were at half their pre war level of around 250 bcm. With current policy settings, the share of fossil fuels in the region’s energy mix is projected to remain high. By 2035, fossil fuels account for nearly 90% of the energy mix in the STEPS, staying broadly constant to 2050. Oil demand rises 8% by 2035 as a result of growth in the transport and industry sectors. Natural gas demand in the STEPS remains almost unchanged, with just a 2% increase by 2050. This small change comes mostly from the power sector, where gas demand grows by 7%. Almost half of the increase in electricity consumption in the STEPS to 2035 is met by fossil fuels. Renewable capacity nearly doubles between 2023 and 2050, which is the lowest regional rate of growth in the STEPS. Hydropower remains the dominant source of renewable electricity in 2050. Azerbaijan will host the 29th Conference of the Parties, the annual United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change conference in 2024. It is a significant opportunity to strengthen the regional collaboration related to energy trade, clean energy investment, methane reduction efforts and energy efficiency commitments. All countries in the Caspian region are signatories to the Global Methane Pledge. Six out of nine Eurasian countries have committed to the COP28 Global Renewables and Energy Efficiency pledge to triple renewables capacity and double the global annual rate of energy efficiency improvements by 2030. Kazakhstan, Georgia, Russia, Kyrgyzstan and Armenia also have longer term net zero emission targets. If announced national energy and climate pledges are achieved in full and on time, as in the APS, this would move the region’s energy system onto a very different footing. In the APS, the share of fossil fuels in the energy mix in Eurasia falls to 75% by 2050, driven by rapid deployment of renewables and nuclear capacity. Natural gas demand drops nearly 15%  by 2035, while a rise in the sales share of electric cars from 1% to 20% help to generate a 3% fall in oil demand by 2035. Coal undergoes the steepest decline in demand among fossil fuels: it falls about 30% by 2035. This drop in fossil fuel use is produced by a rapid rise in clean energy investment, which more than triples to 2035, resulting in a doubling of renewables capacity in the power sector over the same period. It also requires large scale modernisation of the region’s electricity grids. These efforts bring about a peak in CO2 emissions in the APS by the mid 2020s, and emissions in the APS are 30% lower in 2050 than current levels, compared to 4% in the STEPS. Turkmenistan, Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan face a common challenge as major gas producing countries in the Caspian region to maintain ageing gas infrastructure while meeting rising demand, which is often heavily subsidised. Upgrades to the gas infrastructure have a critical role to play in the broader modernisation of the region’s energy system, alongside the expansion of renewables, and as a way to unlock needed improvements in energy efficiency. Over 15% of the world's natural gas is transported in pipelines that traverse Russia and the Caspian region. Much of this infrastructure was built during the Soviet era, and its condition has deteriorated in many cases due to a lack of investment. As a result, many Caspian countries suffer from power rationing, outages and even blackouts, as well as major fugitive methane emissions. Taking action to reduce methane emissions is highly cost effective. Around 10 Mt of methane in the Caspian region is estimated to be lost as fugitive emissions each year and an additional 2 Mt are flared. If instead this natural gas had been exported in 2023, it would have been worth up to USD 8 billion. Improving the efficiency of the ageing infrastructure could cost USD 500 000 to USD 3 million per kilometre depending on the location, while the annual investment cost of tackling methane emissions to 2030 is estimated at around USD 700 million. Without action to improve energy efficiency and upgrade infrastructure, some countries are likely to see increasing strains on their natural gas balance. Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan are already struggling to meet rising domestic natural gas demand, compelling them to reduce gas exports to China in 2023. In our projections, domestic demand rises from over 135 bcm to nearly 160 bcm in the STEPS by 2035, although it stabilises at around today’s levels in the APS. The export opportunity depends also on broader market considerations, including competition from LNG: in the STEPS, the Caspian region is projected to export 95 bcm of natural gas in 2035, up from 70 bcm today. But in the APS, these flows dwindle to 55 bcm as the main export markets start to shift away from gas. Some of the main opportunities for natural gas related efficiency gains in the APS, compared with the STEPS, are in the power sector. Almost 40% of the savings come from efficiency improvements in gas fired combined heat and power plants, where 6,5 GW of new capacity additions come online in the APS between 2024 and 2035 to replace ageing, inefficient units. A quarter of the savings come from efficiency improvements in the oil and gas sector, including reductions in methane leakage and flaring. Methane intensity in the oil and gas sector in the Caspian, currently three times higher than the global average, is reduced 70% by 2030, while flaring intensity sees a decline of more than 95% by the end of the decade in the APS. A further 13%  is saved by gas heating technology improvements in the buildings sector, and another 13% is saved by 2035 through more efficient gas turbines in power generation. Under 12% of savings come from efficiency improvements in industry. If implemented, all these measures to improve the efficiency of natural gas use would account for around 70% of what is needed to double overall energy intensity improvements by 2030. A successful energy efficiency improvement programme requires policies, regulations and technical standards to curb emissions and to incentivise investment to upgrade outdated infrastructure. This includes modernising compressor stations, investing in leak detection and repair programmes, and implementing digital tools for flow optimisation and predictive maintenance. Pairing such a programme with implementation of CCUS technologies would further reduce emissions intensity, although this would require substantial additional investment. Fostering higher levels of collaboration between international oil companies operating in the region and NOCs in order to share know how and global best practices would also bring benefits, as would collaborative partnerships with importing regions on emissions management in oil and gas supply. In recent years, China has shaped global energy markets more than any other country. It is responsible for over two thirds of global oil demand growth in the decade to 2023 and onethird of global natural gas demand growth. It is also responsible for around 80% of the growth in global CO2 emissions over the last decade and is now, by far, the largest emitter worldwide. At the same time, China is a clean energy powerhouse. China accounts for more than 40% of global installed capacity for wind and solar PV, and more than half of the electric cars in the world today. In 2023, China added almost 50 GW of new coal fired power plants, but also a record 260 GW of solar PV and over 75 GW of wind. Over the outlook period, China’s GDP is set to grow by slightly less than 4% each year to 2030, and then by 2,4% from 2030 to 2050. The latest data for 2024 show a major slowdown in oil demand growth in China. Demand is projected to peak before 2030 in the STEPS, led by increasing electrification of the road transportation sector. Electric cars are projected to capture nearly 70% of new sales in 2030, up from nearly 40% in 2023, and to account for nearly one third of cars on the road by 2030. When its oil demand peaks in the STEPS, oil demand per capita in China will be around half that of advanced economies. Nonetheless, in the STEPS, China surpasses the United States by 2030 to become the world’s largest oil market. Once it has peaked, demand falls slowly in the STEPS, and is still close to the 2023 level in 2035. In the APS, it around 15% lower than in 2023 by 2035. The final energy consumption sectors account for nearly one third of coal demand in China, largely due to its huge cement and steel industries. However, final consumption of coal peaked in 2014 and continues to decline slowly as the industrial sector restructures. Coal demand for electricity generation continues to rise in the STEPS before peaking in the next few years, leading to a peak in total coal demand. China dominates global clean energy manufacturing. It accounts for over 80% of global solar PV module and EV battery cell production. Its solar PV manufacturing capacity was over 850 GW in 2023, compared with global installations of 425 GW that year, and its installed battery manufacturing capacity was 2 140 GWh, compared with annual global demand of around 870 GWh. China’s huge manufacturing capacity for renewable power technologies provides the basis for continuing strong domestic deployment. In the STEPS, capacity additions of wind average around 75 GW and solar PV average around 350 GW through to 2030, adding on average around 500 TWh of clean electricity supply per year. Combined with expanding hydro and nuclear generation, growth in clean sources of electricity exceeds the annual average growth of electricity demand, which rises around 430 TWh per year to 2030. This is what leads coal fired generation to peak by 2030. The extraordinary consequences of simply maintaining the current expansion of solar PV capacity can be illustrated with one data point: by 2035 in the STEPS, solar PV generation in China exceeds the total electricity demand of the United States today. The biggest risk to this expansion is the challenge of grid integration. Concerns are arising about curtailment of variable renewables, though China is increasing the flexibility of its electricity system, adding 23 GW of “new energy storage”, that is largely batteries, and 6 GW of pumped hydro storage in 2023. China is likely to miss its headline energy and carbon intensity targets for 2025, which aim for improvements of 13,5% and 18% respectively by 2025 relative to 2020 levels. On the other hand, China is on track to achieve its 2030 target of installing 1 200 GW of wind and solar already in 2024. The 15th Five Year Plan is under preparation and will apply to the 20262030 period. It is likely to signal how China expects to meet its goal of securing a peak in emissions before 2030 and putting emissions on a downwards pathway towards net zero by 2060. The State Council’s newly published work plan on the Dual Carbon Control System reinforces the government focus on controlling carbon emissions but maintains flexibility on the envisaged level of emissions before the peak date of 2030. GDP growth has become more electricity intensive in China in recent years. In the prepandemic period, GDP and electricity consumption grew in lockstep, but since 2019 electricity consumption has increased nearly 50% faster than GDP . Between 2019 and 2023, electricity demand in industry increased around 860 TWh, of which about 200 TWh was in clean energy manufacturing. China’s industrial production and exports also rose sharply during this period, while the structure of its industrial output shifted towards more electricity intensive sectors. In the buildings sector, growth in cooling, heating and appliance ownership resulted in an increase of around 730 TWh in the same period, of which about 20% was for space cooling. In the 2023 2030 period, total final electricity consumption grows around 420 TWh per year in China in the STEPS. Total growth amounts to 2 910 TWh in this period, roughly equivalent to the combined electricity consumption of the European Union and Korea today. By 2030, China’s per capita electricity consumption overtakes that of advanced economies as a group . Its electricity consumption is dominated by the industry sector, and per capita industrial electricity consumption exceeds that of Japan and Korea by 2030. In contrast, electricity consumption per capita in its buildings sector is projected in the STEPS to remain below that of advanced economies in 2030. Continued economic growth, rising incomes and manufacturing output all contribute to higher electricity demand. Electrification is also a major factor. Energy consumption in China is already more electrified than that of advanced economies as a group when measured as the share of electricity in total final consumption. The share of electricity in final consumption in China exceeded that of oil in 2023. By 2030 in the STEPS, almost one third of its final energy consumption is from electricity, and China overtakes Japan to become the most electrified major economy in the world. Clean electricity supply in China is more than able to keep pace with this rapid growth in electricity demand in the STEPS outlook. Of course, it is possible that demand growth will be even faster than projected or conversely that there will be a slowdown in the rate of clean electricity capacity additions. These sensitivities are explored in Chapter 4. India was the fastest growing major economy in 2023, with output increasing by 7,8%. It is on track to become the third largest economy in the world by 2028. India overtook China in 2023 to become the most populous country in the world, even as its fertility rate dropped below replacement level. Looking ahead, India faces a range of challenges on the energy front, including ensuring universal clean cooking access, reducing fossil fuel import dependence, boosting the reliability of the power sector and the financial performance of distribution companies, addressing high levels of air pollution, and managing the impacts of climate extremes, especially heat waves and floods. The population size and the scale of rising demand from all sectors mean that India is poised to experience more energy demand growth than any other country over the next decade. In the STEPS, India is on track to add over 12 000 cars every day to its roads over the period to 2035. Built space is set to increase by over 1 billion square metres annually, which is larger than the total built space in South Africa today. By 2035, iron and steel production are on track to grow by 70% cement output is set to rise by nearly 55% and the stock of air conditioners is projected to grow by over 4,5 times, resulting in electricity demand from air conditioners in 2035 that is more than Mexico’s total expected electricity consumption that year. Total energy demand in India increases by nearly 35% by 2035 in the STEPS, and its electricity generation capacity nearly triples to 1 400 GW by 2035. Coal is set to retain a strong position in the energy mix in India over the next decades. In the STEPS, nearly 60 GW of coal fired capacity is added net of retirements by 2030, and electricity generation from coal rises by over 15%. Generation from coal remains over 30% higher than that from solar PV even in a decade in which solar PV accountings for twice as much capacity, owing to the lower capacity factor of solar installations. Coal has been playing a prominent role to meet energy demand in industry, providing 40% of its energy needs in 2023. By 2035, the consumption of coal in industry would have grown by 50%, with its share in total industry demand remaining at similar levels as today. India has a range of ambitions that are set to shape its future energy use and emissions pathway, most notably is the commitment to achieve net zero emissions by 2070, which is reflected in the APS. In this scenario, clean power generation is nearly 20% higher than in the STEPS by 2035, and India has the world’s third largest installed battery storage capacity in place by 2030 to accommodate the rising share of variable renewables. There is also a rapid rise in electric mobility, and this contributes to oil consumption peaking in the 2030s. Coal use in industry also peaks in the 2030s as industrial use of electricity and hydrogen rises steadily. On its trajectory to net zero emissions by 2070, India’s aggregate annual CO2 emissions reach 2,5 billion tonnes in 2035, which is 25% below the level in the STEPS. India is one of the largest markets in the world for two/three wheel vehicles, and the fourthlargest passenger car market. Over the next decade, India adds over 37 million cars and over 75 million two/three wheelers to its roads in the STEPS. While an increasing share of vehicle sales are electric, the simultaneous growth of internal combustion engine vehicles results in oil demand from road transport rising 40% by 2035 in the STEPS, contributing to an increased dependence on oil imports. Adding over 12 000 additional cars every day in India places significant further demands on road infrastructure, exacerbates already poor air quality, and contributes to a 30% rise in CO2 emissions from all road passenger transport by 2035. In response to these challenges, the government is planning to promote road transport electrification, scale up light urban rail and other public transport, strengthen regulations on fuel efficiency, step up the blending of biofuels in gasoline, and support compressed natural gas as an alternative fuel. While many of these measures contribute to reductions in oil demand and emissions across the scenarios, the rapid scaling up of EVs is poised to have the biggest impact. India already has a range of policies in place that promote the electrification of road transport. Over the past few years, the Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of Electric Vehicles  scheme offered subsidies to support the electrification of over 1,3 million EVs of varying kinds, achieving between 55 84% of its original targets across a range of vehicle types, including buses, passenger cars, and two/three wheelers . The second phase of FAME ended in March 2024. In September 2024, the national government announced the PM Electric Drive Revolution in Innovative Vehicle Enhancement  programme which seeks to incentivise the uptake of 2,8 million electric two/three wheelers and over 14 000 electric buses. It also supports the installation of over 22 000 fast chargers. In addition to the national government’s incentives, several state governments in India have additional demand incentives in the form of subsidies, tax breaks and incentives to promote charging infrastructure. In addition, cities including Mumbai and Pune in Maharashtra and Amritsar in Punjab have created comprehensive mobility plans that explicitly include EVs within overall transport infrastructure planning . India’s stated objective to support the electrification of buses and two/three wheelers is noteworthy, since many commuters rely on public transport and two/three wheelers for transport. Passenger car ownership rates remain well below the global average. There are 35 cars for every 1 000 people in India, compared with a global average of 162 per 1 000 people and 480 per 1 000 people in advanced economies. On average, people living in India travel only one eighth as far by car each year as those in advanced economies. Yet there are 157 two/three wheelers per 1 000 people, 50% more than the global average and more than 2,5 times as many as in advanced economies. Thanks partly to available incentives, 5% of two wheelers, 50% of three wheelers and 7% of buses sold in India today are electric. Over the next decade, two/three wheelers and buses see faster rates of electrification in the STEPS than passenger cars because of existing government support, consumer preferences and the state of market development. With the net zero emissions by 2070 pathway in India, which is reflected in the APS, EVs account for a larger share of vehicle sales – especially for passenger cars – by 2035 than they do in the STEPS. Electric bus sales in the STEPS, on the other hand, are already similar to the APS trajectory as a result of existing government support and market activity. As a result of increased vehicle electrification, efficiency and uptake of biofuels in APS, both oil demand and CO2 emissions from road passenger vehicles are around 17% lower in the APS by 2035 than in the STEPS. While they continue to rise in the coming years, both oil consumption and CO2 emissions also begin to decline in the APS by the mid 2030s, while they keep rising in the STEPS. Combustion related air pollutants such as fine particulate matter  and nitrogen oxides  in passenger road transport decline in both scenarios, with reductions stemming from improved fuel standards as well as vehicle electrification, but they decline further in the APS, where the level of these air pollutants is around 10% lower by 2035 than in the STEPS. Electrification of road transport in line with the net zero emissions by 2070 ambition therefore presents multiple benefits to India’s environment and economy. Japan is the second largest and Korea the fourth largest economies in the Asia Pacific region. While there are many differences between these two countries, their economies and energy systems have some common features: relatively low and stable growth and inflation rates ageing populations and falling birth rates substantial capacity to generate electricity from nuclear power and major hard to abate industrial sectors. Energy intensive industries today account for 22% of total energy use in Japan and Korea, compared with 15% globally 96% of energy for those industries is sourced from fossil fuels, nearly all of which are imported. Fossil fuel demand is set to fall continuously as populations shrink and energy efficiency improves. Much has already been done to boost energy efficiency, which has improved by 30% since 2000. However, energy efficiency needs to improve by a further 25% by 2035, driving a total energy demand reduction of 5% to deliver the CO2 reductions seen in the APS. Both countries are taking steps to bring about more gains in energy efficiency. In Korea, the Special Act on the Promotion of Distributed Energy took effect in June 2024 to complement the current centralised power system and prevent the unnecessary expansion of the transmission network. Japan’s new energy efficiency technology strategy, approved in 2024, highlights important technologies for each energy sector, including non fossil fuel sources such as hydrogen, ammonia and synthetic methane. In the APS, the share of electricity generation from renewables in the two countries combined increases from 18% today to 48% in 2035, while the share of electricity generation from nuclear increases from 17% to 26%. Japan established the Basic Policy for the Realisation of Green Transformation to raise public and private investment and strengthen support for low emissions technologies. In the wake of this policy, a new carbon capture and storage  law was adopted in 2024 to foster a business environment to spur CCS projects by 2030. The Hydrogen Society Promotion Act was also adopted to reduce the price gap between hydrogen and conventional fuels, with subsidies of Japanese yen  3 trillion available over the next 15 years. In Korea, the 11th Basic Plan for Long term Electricity Supply and Demand  will be finalised in late 2024 to boost power generation from carbon free sources. Korea launched the world's first clean hydrogen power bidding market in May 2024. In addition, Korea commissioned the 30 000 tonne per year Incheon Liquefied Hydrogen Plant. Recent policy changes are promoting nuclear expansion in Korea, witnessed by the commissioning of the Shin Hanul Unit 2 in 2024. Restarting existing reactors remains a priority for Japan to achieve its 2030 targets and energy security. It plans to restart two reactors in 2024 to add to the two restarted last year. Meeting the goals of the APS requires a boost in annual clean energy investment in Japan and Korea from USD 120 billion to over USD 180 billion by 2035. Korea has announced Korean won  420 trillion in policy loans to support clean energy technologies and to reduce emissions, together with a plan of KRW 9 trillion fund to finance green energy sources. In Japan, the world’s first sovereign transition bonds were issued in 2024 as part of a plan to raise more than JPY 150 trillion through public and private financing over the next decade. In addition to accelerating decarbonisation of their economies, these measures to support new green energy investment help to reduce energy import dependence in Japan and Korea. Japan and Korea have significant energyand carbon intensive industry sectors which account for approximately 30% of GDP for each. Most energy used in industry is imported, which creates a priority for energy security during energy transitions. In the APS, energy supplies in Japan and Korea are underpinned by a variety of sources over the next decade as they pivot to increased use of clean energy sources – including renewables, nuclear and lowemissions fuels – to reduce emissions and secure supply . Although the share of fossil fuels in power generation decreases through to 2035 and beyond, natural gas continues to provide stable and flexible power for both countries in light of limited domestic supply options or interconnections with neighbouring countries. Natural gas is projected to remain an important energy source, accounting for nearly 12% of the power mix in 2035 in the APS, though gas fired power drops to just 3% by 2050. Nuclear, an important clean energy source for stable electricity supply, accounts for over 15% of electricity generation in Japan and Korea today. In Korea, the draft of the 11th Basic Plan, which is due for adoption in late 2024, puts emphasis on more nuclear and less coal for power generation. Up to three new large scale nuclear power units are being considered in the plan. In Japan, the Sixth Strategic Energy Plan and the Green Transformation bill support the role of nuclear to reduce CO2 emissions from fossil fuels. Policy support in both countries is expected to increase the share of nuclear to over 25% by 2035 in the APS. Both countries have underlined the crucial importance of ensuring efficient and effective safety regulation. Beyond conventional energy sources, both countries need new technologies to decarbonise their economies and improve supply security. Hydrogen has a major part to play, enabled by ammonia, a derivative of hydrogen. Ammonia is relatively easy to transport long distances, so it can be used to supplement variable generation from renewables in which capacity is limited in both countries by land availability. Although hydrogen and ammonia only provide 4% of power in the APS by 2035, they have a key role as dispatchable low carbon fuels. Japan and Korea are among the few countries with a stated policy to use hydrogen for power generation and are likely to have an important role in driving technological progress as the biggest consumers of hydrogen for power. In the APS, they account for 37% of electricity generated from hydrogen worldwide in 2035. Japan began co firing ammonia in coal power plants in 2024 – a first step towards producing power from ammonia only. Perovskite solar cells, which are derived from a non silicon based thin film PV technology, are of particular interest in Japan and Korea. Both need to increase their deployment of solar PV, which more than doubles its share of electricity generation from 8% today to 21% by 2035 in the APS. However, both countries already have high levels of installed solar PV capacity relative to their non forested land area , as their high population densities and specific geographies limit the amount of land available for panel installations. Perovskite solar cells can enable capacity expansion without increasing land use: because they are light and flexible, they can be installed on walls and roofs with low load bearing capacity. To lower costs and raise efficiencies, both governments are funding research and development, and supporting new projects. Southeast Asia is one of the fastest growing economies in the world. It has an increasingly critical role in global energy security and clean energy transitions. Collectively the regional economy grew 4% in 2023, reflecting its continued post pandemic recovery. Home to around 685 million people, Southeast Asia represents 9% of the global population and accounts for 6% of global GDP. GDP per capita in Southeast Asia is well below the global average. Each of the ten countries in Southeast Asia is distinctive in terms of development, industrial output, politics and geography. In Myanmar, energy demand per capita is just a fifth of the global average in Singapore – where the first IEA Regional Cooperation Centre is to be established in 2024 – it is almost four times the global average. Energy development priorities also vary across countries with different resource endowments, though common concerns include managing the impacts of climate change, investing in infrastructure and mobilising international investment, and cooperation via the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. Rising demand from key sectors, notably power, transport and industry, drove a 5% increase in energy demand in 2023. This slows to an average of around 2,5% per year over the next decade. Major regional industries include manufacturing, tourism and the digital economy, all of which are likely to expand in the years ahead. Demand for data processing power and data centre capacity is rising across the region. Half of global mined nickel production in 2023 was in Indonesia, giving it a crucial link in the supply chain for EV batteries. VinFast, a Vietnamese automaker, is a leading EV manufacturer in Southeast Asia around 15% of new car sales were electric in Viet Nam in 2023, the highest share of any country in the region. Southeast Asia sees the second fastest growth in energy demand after India, adding more than 20 EJ to demand by 2050 in the STEPS. While global energy demand is expected to increase around 6% by 2035 in the STEPS, it is set to increase by a third in Southeast Asia. In the STEPS, investment in renewables is on course to triple in the region by 2035, from a relatively low base, almost tripling installed renewables capacity from current levels, while spending on energy efficiency is also projected to rise strongly by 2035. In the APS, renewables capacity increases twice as fast as in the STEPS by 2035, and spending on energy efficiency is 30% higher, though in both scenarios improvements in energy intensity levels lag other regions, including India. Against a background of sharply rising overall energy demand, the measures in the STEPS are not enough to prevent demand for oil and natural gas from rising through to 2050, although coal demand flattens out in the 2040s. In the APS, by contrast, demand for all three fossil fuels starts to decline from mid 2030s. Fossil fuels accounted for almost 75% of power sector inputs in 2023 in Southeast Asia. Dependence on imports is set to deepen, with the region on track to become a net importer of natural gas in the late 2020s. Affordability and energy security are priority considerations as the region considers its energy future, together with the role of the energy sector in economic development and emissions reductions. Coal is the primary power source in Southeast Asia today. Of the additional electricity generated over the past 20 years, 60% was from coal, and the region has nearly 110 GW of existing installed coal fired capacity. Over 50% of this capacity is less than 10 years old, and over 80% is less than 20 years old. Since the technical lifetime of a coal plant is typically 40 50 years, many plants potentially have decades of operation ahead. Emissions from coalfired power generation in Southeast Asia were 650 Mt CO2 in 2023, equating to 35% of its total energy related CO2 emissions. Furthermore, new plants are still being commissioned: coal fired generation capacity continues to increase until the 2040s in the STEPS, while in the APS it peaks around 2030. The essential condition for reducing reliance on coal and cutting emissions from coal fired power generation is to develop clean and affordable ways of providing the energy services that coal plants currently provide, both for generation and for electricity system reliability services. This is crucial to avoid trade offs between the need to reduce coal use and the need to ensure electricity security and development objectives. Building up clean sources of generation more quickly should allow for permitting of new coal plants to be halted, but measures are also needed to reduce emissions from operating plants or those at an advanced stage of development. Moving coal plants towards retirement typically requires funds to support their managed phase out. The Energy Transition Mechanism arranged by the Asian Development Bank provides one financing route for early retirement, while a number of other initiatives are looking to develop solutions for transition credits to be utilised as a credible financing instrument. Apart from retiring plants early, strategies to tackle emissions include repurposing to focus on system adequacy or flexibility services, co firing with ammonia and biomass, and retrofitting with CCUS. Focussing operations on system adequacy or flexibility services means that coal plants operate at lower capacity factors, thereby producing less electricity and emissions, but they remain available for use when system needs are highest. Repurposing coal plants for flexibility is widely adopted in the APS because it enables the existing coal fleet to support and facilitate the integration of rapidly increasing shares of variable renewables. While some coal plants may require minor equipment upgrades to operate more flexibly, the main challenges generally arise from the need to adapt existing operational practices and contract structures. Retrofitting coal fired power plants with carbon capture or using low emissions fuels like ammonia or biomass are other options to cut emissions from existing facilities. In the STEPS and APS, switching to use higher shares of low emissions fuels gains some momentum. However, the higher fuel cost of ammonia means that these plants run at lower capacity factors than unabated coal plants today and primarily serve to provide flexibility and backup capacity, rather than baseload electricity . In both the STEPS and APS, existing older and less efficient subcritical coal plants are the first to pivot to provide flexibility and adequacy services rather than bulk electricity, helping to cut emissions from this plant type by an average 3 Mt per year in the STEPS and nearly 17 Mt per year in the APS over the period to 2035. More efficient supercritical and other advanced coal plants continue to operate at high load factors in the STEPS, with additional plants of these types coming online and increasing aggregate emissions. In the APS, these plants also start operating more flexibly in response to changes in the rest of the power system, especially as wind and solar PV deployment accelerates after 2030, and this helps to cut emissions further . As a result of the shift towards more flexible operations, early retirements and fewer new coal plants being commissioned, total annual CO2 emissions from coal generation in Southeast Asia drop by 20% to 510 Mt CO2 in 2035 in the APS. In the STEPS, by contrast, emissions continue to grow to nearly 820 Mt CO2 in 2035 as new capacity comes online and existing supercritical and advanced coal power plants by and large continue to operate in baseload mode. Total energy supply  is equivalent to electricity and heat generation plus the other energy sector, excluding electricity, heat and hydrogen, plus total final consumption, excluding electricity, heat and hydrogen. TES does not include ambient heat from heat pumps or electricity trade. Solar in TES includes solar PV generation, concentrating solar power  and final consumption of solar thermal. Biofuels conversion losses are the conversion losses to produce biofuels  used in the energy sector. Low‐emissions hydrogen production is merchant low‐emissions hydrogen production , with inputs referring to total fuel inputs and outputs to produce hydrogen. While not itemised separately, geothermal and marine  energy are included in the renewables category of TES and electricity and heat sectors. While not itemised separately, nonrenewable waste and other sources are included in TES. Sectors comprising total final consumption  include industry , transport and buildings . While not itemised separately, agriculture and other non energy use are included in TFC. While not itemised separately, non renewable waste, solar thermal and geothermal energy are included in buildings, industry and TFC. Aviation and shipping include both domestic and international energy demand. Energy demand from international marine and aviation bunkers are included in global transport totals and TFC. Oil production and demand is expressed in million barrels per day . Tight oil includes tight crude oil and condensate production except for the United States, which includes tight crude oil only . Processing gains cover volume increases that occur during crude oil refining. Biofuels and their inclusion in liquids demand is expressed in energy equivalent volumes of gasoline and diesel. Natural gas production and demand is expressed in billion cubic metres . Coal production and demand is expressed in million tonnes of coal equivalent . Differences between historical production and demand volumes for oil, gas and coal are due to changes in stocks. Bunkers include both international marine and aviation fuels. Refining capacity at risk is defined as the difference between refinery capacity and refinery runs, with the latter including a 14% allowance for downtime. Projected shutdowns beyond those publicly announced are also counted as capacity at risk. Electricity generation expressed in terawatt hours  and installed electrical capacity data expressed in gigawatts  are both provided on a gross basis, that is includes own use by the generator. Projected gross electrical capacity is the sum of existing capacity and additions, less retirements. While not itemised separately, other sources are included in total electricity generation. Hydrogen and ammonia are fuels that can provide a low emissions alternative to natural gasand coal fired electricity generation – either through co firing or full conversion of facilities. Blending levels of hydrogen in gas fired plants and ammonia in coal fired plants are represented in the scenarios and reported in the tables. The electricity generation outputs in the tables are based on fuel input shares, while the hydrogen and ammonia capacity is derived based on a typical capacity factor. Total CO2 includes carbon dioxide emissions from the combustion of fossil fuels and non renewable wastes from industrial and fuel transformation processes  and from flaring and CO2 removal. CO2 removal includes: captured and stored emissions from the combustion of bioenergy and renewable wastes from biofuels production and from direct air capture. Aviation and shipping include both domestic and international emissions. The first two entries are often reported as bioenergy with carbon capture and storage . Note that some of the CO2 captured from biofuels production and direct air capture is used to produce synthetic fuels, which is not included as CO2 removal. Total CO2 captured includes the carbon dioxide captured from CCUS facilities, such as electricity generation or industry, and atmospheric CO2 captured through direct air capture, but excludes that captured and used for urea production. The emissions intensity expressed in grammes of carbon dioxide per kilowatt‐hour  is calculated based on electricity‐only plants and the electricity component of combined heat and power  plants.Primary chemicals include ethylene, propylene, aromatics, methanol and ammonia. Industrial production data for aluminium excludes production based on internally generated scrap. Heavy duty trucks activity includes freight activity of medium freight trucks and heavy freight trucks. Aviation activity includes both domestic and international flight activity. Shipping activity refers to international shipping activity. GDP means gross domestic product. GJ means gigajoule. m2 means square Metres. Mt means million tonnes. pkm means passenger‐kilometres. PPP means purchasing power parity. tkm means tonnes‐kilometres. Total hydrogen demand includes merchant  hydrogen demand and hydrogen demand in industry and refineries covered by onsite production. It also includes hydrogen used in the production of hydrogen based fuels . The hydrogen balance table A.28 is expressed in million tonnes of hydrogen equivalent, which means for hydrogen based fuels the mass of hydrogen feedstock needed to produce them. Hydrogen demand in end use sectors includes total final consumption of hydrogen and hydrogen based fuels as well as hydrogen demand in industry covered by onsite production within industrial facilities. Low emissions hydrogen trade as a share of production represents the percentage of produced low emissions hydrogen  which is exported from the region as hydrogen or as an energy product.